<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-model href="http://www.tei-c.org/release/xml/tei/custom/schema/relaxng/tei_all.rng" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?>
<TEI xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"
  xmlns:math="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title>Asking a Forbidden Question: Rethinking 'Leitmotifs' in Wagner’s <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi></title>
				<author>
					<persName>Laurence Dreyfus</persName>
				</author>
      </titleStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <p/>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p/>
      </sourceDesc>
			<profileDesc>
				<abstract>
				</abstract>
			</profileDesc>
    </fileDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <body>
			<div>
			<head>Doubts about the 'leitmotif'</head>
			<p>It takes only a slight acquaintance with the composer Richard
			Wagner (1813-1883) to know that his stage works positively
			abound in repeating musical tags or ‘leitmotifs’. These
			remarkable reiterations of short phrases seem, in fact, to
			permeate the musical experience of an entire evening, with
			melodies burnished pleasantly in the memory or, for some,
			endured as annoying earworms. Or perhaps they are both. In a
			much-publicised lecture of 1933 (that sparked his forced exile
			from Germany), Thomas Mann echoed this paradox when he quipped
			that Wagner ‘treats his listeners like fools and repeats a thing
			so many times until it drives you mad – and you believe
			it.’<note place="end"><p>Thomas Mann, <hi rend="italic">Pro and Contra Richard
			Wagner</hi>, trans. Allan Blunden (Chicago: University of Chicago
			Press, 1992), 94. I’ve treated aspects of Mann’s reception of
			Wagner in ‘Music and Motive in Thomas Mann’s <hi rend="italic">Wälsungenblut’,
			Resounding Concerns</hi>, London German Studies VIII, ed. Rüdiger
			Görner (Munich: iudicium verlag, 2003), 86-113.</p></note>Mann’s
			view has to be taken with a pinch of salt, since he remained
			throughout his life a fervent acolyte as well as a critical
			Wagnerian. So if Wagner’s condescension succeeded in crafting a
			convincing artistic experience – one that 'you believe'
			condescension succeeded in crafting a convincing artistic
			experience – one that ‘you believe’ –, that is no mean
			feat. Voiced by a literary man rather than a musician, Mann’s
			statement has to count as high praise, but it is intriguing that
			he links credibility to constant musical repetition, one of the
			chief complaints of Wagner’s detractors. For if the act of
			repeating motifs ‘drives you mad’, how do they persuade you at
			the same time?</p>
			<p>Since the 19<hi rend="superscript">th</hi>
			century, writings on Wagner’s leitmotifs have perpetuated the
			idea that Wagner repeated his musical motifs to help the
			audience recall the drama. That is, in replaying bits of music
			in the orchestra, the composer reminded listeners of what
			happened earlier onstage. Even a theme of ‘presentiment’ or
			<hi rend="italic">Ahnung</hi> – a term Wagner discusses in his treatise <hi rend="italic">Oper
			und Drama</hi> (1851) to denote a foreshadowing of a future
			dramatic event – implies dramatic recall, since once the
			‘musical motif’ (also called a ‘melodic moment’) was finally
			sounded and linked to a dramatic action, it transformed itself
			into a reminiscence’ or <hi rend="italic">Erinnerung</hi><note
			place="end"><p>Richard Wagner, <hi rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi>, ed. and
			commentary by Klaus Kropfinger (Stuttgart: Phillipp Reclam Jun.,
			1984), 361. One can see from the title of a recent German
			monograph on the subject that that presentiment [<hi rend="italic">Ahnung</hi>]
			and reminiscence [<hi rend="italic">Erinnerung</hi>] remain key terms defining
			Wagner’s leitmotifs. See Melanie Wald and Wolfgang Fuhrmann,
			<hi rend="italic">Ahnung und Erinnerung: Die Dramaturgie der Leitmotive bei
			Richard Wagner</hi> (Kassel: Bärenreiter, 2013).</p></note>.  A few
			years earlier, in 1848, Wagner had suggested in conversation
			that he had broadened the ‘meaningful participation of the
			orchestra in the dramatic expression’, especially at the end of
			his most recently completed opera Lohengrin, where several key
			musical themes from earlier in the opera are heard once
			again.<note place="end"><p>The sculptor Gustav Adolf Kietz
			attributes this phrase to Wagner on an evening in December of
			1848 when the composer recited his poem for <hi rend="italic">Siegfrieds
			Tod</hi>. In the ensuing discussion, Wagner claimed that the
			orchestra participated in the dramatic expression but also that
			it was necessary that words sung onstage predominate more than
			ever before. After someone noted an apparent contradiction here
			– surely the orchestra and the sung text couldn’t both
			predominate – Wagner pointed to the end of Lohengrin (still not
			yet heard in performance) where ‘he had gone much further than
			in Tannhäuser’ and where both claims were reconciled. Recounted
			in Carl Friedrich Glasenapp, <hi rend="italic">Das Leben Richard Wagners</hi> (Leipzig,
			1910), II:308-9 as cited in Richard Wagner, <hi rend="italic">Sämtliche Werke</hi> 26
			[hereafter, SW], <hi rend="italic">Dokumente und Texte zu ‘Lohengrin’</hi>, eds. John
			Deathridge and Klaus Döge (Mainz: Schott Musik International),
			35.</p></note> Yet how does an orchestra behave dramatically? Is it
			a character in its own right, an omniscient narrator, a Greek
			chorus, and if so, are these assignments maintained with any
			consistency?  Within the scholarly community, Wagner specialists
			have been keen to embrace broader definitions of a ‘leitmotif’,
			allowing for repetitions that are purely musical or ‘structural’
			in nature, and therefore devoid of dramatic content. Some
			scholars even argue that on occasion Wagner repeated themes in a
			highhanded, arbitrary and even counter-intuitive manner.<note place="end"><p>Thomas S. Grey covers
			a great deal of the relevant ground in ‘ . . . wie ein rother
			Faden: On the origins of 'leitmotif' as critical construct and
			musical practice’ in <hi rend="italic">Music Theory in the 19th Century</hi>, ed. Ian
			Bent (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996),
			187-210. Carolyn Abbate, on the other hand, in ‘Wagner, “On
			Modulation”, and Tristan’, <hi rend="italic">Cambridge Opera Journal</hi> 1, (1989),
			45, goes so far as to suggest that ‘Wagner’s motifs have no
			referential meaning’, arguing that Wagner writes music that
			‘projects poetry and stage action in ways far beyond motivic
			signs’. John Deathridge occupies a more middling position with
			regard to leitmotivic reference, asserting, for example, that
			‘in the music of <hi rend="italic">Götterdämmerung</hi> generally, many motifs are
			closely tied to meanings while others are relatively indifferent
			to them – a calculated inconsistency that was one of the fruits
			of writing <hi rend="italic">Tristan</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Die Meistersinger</hi>’. John Deathridge,
			Wagner Beyond Good and Evil (Berkeley, CA.: University of
			California Press, 2008), 94. Christian Thorau, another authority
			on leitmotif, sees their objectification as a misunderstanding
			of Wagner’s idea of ‘emotional understanding’ or
			<hi rend="italic">Gefühlsverständnis</hi>. See his ‘Guides for Wagnerites: Leitmotifs
			and Wagnerian Listening’ in <hi rend="italic">Richard Wagner and his World</hi>,
			ed. Thomas S. Grey (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
			2009), 133-50. </p></note>   All
			the same, the Wagnerian ‘leitmotif’ has rarely been questioned
			as a fundamental category of description.</p>

			<p>On purely historical grounds, though, we should be suspicious
			of the ‘leitmotif’ or ‘leading motif’ as applied to Wagner,
			since the composer never made use of the term and in fact
			rejected it out of hand. In aa often quoted passage from an
			essay published in 1879 called ‘On the Application of Music to
			the Drama’, the composer famously distanced himself from
			‘leitmotifs’:</p>
			<quote rend="block">To my knowledge this path [showing how
			musical forms arise in my dramatic works] has not yet been
			pursued, and I need only recall that one of my younger friends
			[Hans von Wolzogen] has examined more explicitly the
			characteristics of what he has called ‘leitmotifs’ according to
			their dramatic sense and effect rather than envisaging their
			exploitation within musical syntax (since the specificities of
			music lay beyond that author’s competence).<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn5" n="5"><p>Richard Wagner, ‘Über die Anwendung der
			Musik auf das Drama’ in <hi rend="italic">Dichtungen und
			Schriften: Jubiläumsausgabe </hi>[hereafter, <hi
			rend="italic">DS</hi>]<hi rend="italic"
			xml:space="preserve">, </hi>ed. Dieter
			Borchmeyer, 10 vols. (Bayreuth: Insel Verlag, 1983),
			9:334. ‘Dieser Weg ist, meines Wissens, noch nicht beschritten
			worden, und ich habe nur des einen meiner jüngeren Freunde zu
			gedenken, der das Charakteristische der von ihm sogenannten
			“Leitmotive” mehr ihrer dramatischen Bedeutsamkeit und
			Wirksamkeit nach, als (da dem Verfasser die spezifische Musik
			fern lag) ihre Verwertung für den musikalischen Satzbau in das
			Auge fassend, ausführlicher in Betrachtung nahm’. In alluding to
			how he used motifs and themes as musical building blocks, Wagner
			departs from views he expressed in <hi rend="italic">Oper
			und Drama</hi>, Part III (1851) where
			he inveighs against musical autonomy and praises an orchestra
			‘at one with the drama’. Richard Wagner, <hi rend="italic"
			xml:space="preserve">DS, </hi>8:364.</p></note>
			</quote>
			<p>Without revealing what he himself called his repeating
			musical units, in this passage Wagner gently criticises
			Wolzogen’s restriction of ‘leitmotifs’ to ‘their dramatic sense
			and effect’ while ignoring their form-building musical
			properties in his dramas. (Here he was referring to Hans von
			Wolzogen’s influential guide to the <hi rend="italic">Ring</hi> entitled a
			<hi rend="italic">Leitfaden</hi> [leading thread] to the work.<note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn6" n="6"><p><hi xml:space="preserve">
			Hans von Wolzogen, </hi><hi rend="italic">Thematischer Leitfaden
			durch die Musik zu Richard Wagner's Festspiel </hi><hi>Der Ring
			des Nibelungen (Leipzig: Schloemp, 1876).</hi></p></note> Whatever
			Wagner meant by ‘their exploitation within musical syntax’
			[<hi rend="italic">ihre Verwertung für den musikalischen Satzbau</hi>], he
			expresses a distaste for the term ‘leitmotif’ not only by
			putting the word in quotes but ascribing its ‘so-called’ use
			[<hi rend="italic">von ihm sogenannten “Leitmotive</hi>”] to Wolzogen rather
			than himself.  Given Wagner’s authority among Wagnerians, one
			would think the term should long ago have been rejected as the
			privileged name for Wagner’s recognisable musical themes. But
			no. Such was the power and success connected to identifying
			leitmotifs in Wagner that even Wolzogen himself published a
			further leitmotivic guide to Parsifal,<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn7" n="7"><p>Hans von Wolzogen, <hi
			rend="italic">Thematischer Leitfaden durch die Musik des
			Parsifal</hi> (Leipzig, 1882). </p></note> and virtually everyone
			has considered the leitmotif both a useful and transhistorical
			category ever since.</p>
			<p>Why did Wagner object to the word ‘leitmotif’? It must have
			been Wolzogen’s implication that ‘leitmotifs’ ‘led’ somewhere or
			to something. ‘Leading’ is of course contained in the first
			component of the composite derived from the German verb
			<hi rend="italic">leiten</hi> meaning ‘to lead’, ‘to conduct’, ‘to direct’ or
			‘to guide’. Since Wagner had referred to musical ‘motifs’ (as
			well as themes) from early on in his writings, what must have
			jarred him was the idea that his identifiable musical units were
			intended as directional pointers or guides which an audience had
			to follow so as to grasp the forward motion of the
			drama. Leaders, after all, need followers! Equally, he must
			surely have balked at the suggestion that his musical motifs
			played a leadership role in the drama, as in the German notion
			of <hi rend="italic">Leitbild</hi>. By rejecting the ‘leitmotif’, Wagner also
			championed a rejection of two concepts already current in his
			day as applied to his music: the <hi rend="italic">Leithammel</hi> or
			bellwether, leader of the pack or the <hi rend="italic">Leitfaden</hi> or
			‘leading thread’ which the Ariadne laid for Theseus to find his
			way out of the maze. For Wagner, his detectable motifs and
			themes did not try to ‘herd’ the audience into understanding any
			more than they functioned as tools to signal the right path to
			escape from a labyrinth.</p>
			<p>If Wagner’s recognizable musical phrases were not meant to
			lead, what did he intend them to do? To answer this question, we
			have to examine how the composer referred to motifs and themes
			over the course of his career, and – no surprise here – he
			frequently changes his mind. That is, there is no one definition
			that will fit works composed from the 1840s to the early
			1880s. Indeed, why should there be? What we can, however, glean,
			from a sample of references are ideas that compete with the
			discredited notion of ‘leitmotifs’ and furnish some keys to
			Wagner’s thinking about his approach to composing music for the
			dramatic stage.  </p>
			<p>The purported relationship between music and text here is
			especially complex since, unlike virtually all other opera
			composers, Wagner authored his own dramatic texts, and this
			means that he surely pondered the role of music at a relatively
			early stage in the conception of a stage work. In a fascinating
			letter to the Berlin journalist Karl Gaillard (1813-1851) from
			1844, Wagner even describes his initial dramatic inspirations as
			directly related to the fabrication of musical motifs: </p>
			<quote rend="block">First a subject attracts me only when it
			displays – not merely its poetic but also <hi rend="italic">simultaneously</hi>
			– its musical significance. Before I even begin to script a line
			of verse, or even sketch out a scene, I am already intoxicated
			[<hi rend="italic">berauscht</hi>] with the musical fragrance of my creation [<hi rend="italic">in dem
			musikalischen Dufte meiner Schöpfung berauscht</hi>]: I have all
			the notes, all the characteristic motifs [<hi rend="italic">alle
			charakteristischen Motive</hi>] in my head….’<note
			place="end"><p>Richard Wagner, <hi rend="italic">Sämtliche Briefe</hi>, ed.
			Gertrud Strobel and Werner Wolf (Leipzig, 1967ff.) [hereafter,
			<hi rend="italic">SB</hi>], <hi rend="italic">SB</hi> II:358.</p></note></quote>
			<p>It’s possible, of course, that Wagner may well have been
			exaggerating in declaring he had ‘all the notes … in his head’
			before he would even ‘begin to script a line of verse’, or
			‘sketch out a scene’. Yet as an admission of aesthetic
			priorities, his stated attraction to a dramatic subject prompted
			by its ‘musical significance’ poses a challenge to conventional
			idea of how an opera is composed: first comes the text, then the
			music that sets it. Not only that. It’s also surprising how
			little rhetorical weight Wagner places on the words of the opera
			libretto: the poetry of a dramatic subject <hi rend="italic">attracts</hi> him,
			whereas music <hi rend="italic">intoxicates</hi> him with its alluring
			fragrance. Whereas the relative importance of music over text
			was already a subject treated in Antonio Salieri’s ‘theatrical
			divertimento’ <hi rend="italic">Prima la music e poi le parole</hi> (1786)
			[<hi rend="italic">First the music and then the words</hi>], here Wagner
			asserts a starkly original point of view regarding the actual
			ordering of composition when the composer and librettist are the
			same person. And what stands out is music’s absolute priority
			over both the poetry and the details of the scenic action. Where
			does he locate this imagined ‘musical significance’?  They are,
			he writes, in ‘all the notes’ found in his head, which seem to
			be identical to ‘all the characteristic motifs’ found later in
			that opera. </p>
			<p>Since the letter to Gailliard is dated 1844, and Wagner had
			just completed the second of his three ‘Romantic’ operas, <hi
			rend="italic">Tannhäuser</hi>,his mention of characteristic
			motifs [<hi rend="italic">charakteristische Motive</hi>] encourages us to
			consider how ‘character’, rather than, say, a ‘leading thread’
			might help detect what Wagner was up to in the early
			operas. Motifs – at least at the time of <hi rend="italic">Tannhäuser</hi>
			–seem to be ‘characteristic’ in that they define attributes and
			create recognisable identities. Powerful enough to have
			‘intoxicated’ the composer with their ‘fragrance’, they occupy a
			significant place in the finished work and their relative
			significance over other musical material allows them to bear
			re-hearings beyond one musical scene. Taken together as a class
			– based on Wagner’s claim that they were imagined before the
			words or scenic action – they can be said to configure the
			dramatic subject rather than merely reflect it.</p>
			<p>But what exactly is ‘characteristic’ about these motifs’? At
			the time, the word ‘character’ in German was still unusual
			enough for the Grimm brothers to note – in their <hi rend="italic">Deutsches
			Wörterbuch</hi> (1854) – that it was ‘an odd-sounding word to
			common folk [<hi rend="italic">ein dem ohr des volks seltsam lautendes
			wort</hi>] and hence required several definitions and
			examples. One of their quotations from Goethe is telling: ‘In
			the novel one should present mostly attitudes and incidents
			[<hi rend="italic">gesinnungen und begebenheiten</hi>], in drama, characters and
			actions [<hi rend="italic">character und thaten</hi>]. The distinction between a
			book and a theatre piece harmonises well with another of the
			Grimms’s definitions: ‘a disposition that manifests itself in
			people’ [<hi rend="italic">gemütsart, wie sie sich in den menschen ausgeprägt
			hat</hi>].<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn9" n="9"><p><hi
			rend="italic">Deutsches Wörterbuch von Jacob Grimm und Wilhelm
			Grimm</hi>, (Leipzig, 1854), II:611-12, <ref
			target="http://dwb.bbaw.de">http://dwb.bbaw.de</ref> accessed 4
			November 2016.</p></note> One can also impute ‘character’ to
			objects, according to the Grimms by endowing them with ‘a
			distinguishing feature, sign or main trait’, as when ‘an
			indelible character is stamped on the matter’ [<hi rend="italic">der sache ist
			ein unvertilgbarer character aufgedrückt</hi>]. Considering
			these definitions and examples, one has a fair idea of the
			semantic frame encompassing Wagner’s ‘characteristic motifs’:
			marked with distinctive features, the patches of music in
			Wagner’s head were imprinted with the traits and feelings evoked
			by personages and deeds in staged drama.
			</p>
			<p>Missing from Wagner’s letter to Gaillard of 1844 is any hint
			of his later desire for a new kind of theatre – elucidated
			throughout <hi rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi> (1851) – in which the poetic
			seed fertilises a musical womb to produce the ideal progeny,
			‘drama’. Note that in this conventionally gendered allegory,
			feminised musical inspirations can’t be prior to or more
			entrancing than the verbal masculine impulse. It is in this
			later dense text – written before a note of music to the <hi rend="italic">Ring
			des Nibelungen</hi> was composed – that Wagner rehearsed his
			newest theories in a subsequent point of view. Instead of
			‘characteristic motifs’ he speaks of ‘melodic moments’ of
			presentiment [<hi rend="italic">Ahnung</hi>] and reminiscence
			[<hi rend="italic">Erinnerung</hi>], music that both foreshadows and
			recalls. Yet even when Wagner speculates on the musical links
			with dramatic recall, his motifs never ‘lead’. Neither are they
			a ‘thread’ that directs us via music to the drama, Wolzogen’s
			influential guides. Indeed, the very idea of a Wagner score as a
			labyrinth which requires a guide chafes against the composer’s
			enduring assertions in <hi rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi> that music embodies
			‘unspeakable’ emotions and gestures attached to the drama.<note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn10" n="10"><p>Some of Wagner’s
			contemporaries invoke the metaphor of a red thread not so much
			to escape from a labyrinth, but rather – as Thomas Grey puts it
			– as ‘an orientational device applied in the process of weaving
			textiles or braiding fibers in the manufacture of rope and
			cord’, in the way a red thread stands out against a more neutral
			background. See Grey, ‘Ein rother Faden’, 197-205, where he
			cites Wagner’s friend Uhlig, who saw <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi><hi>’s most ‘significant musical
			thoughts [</hi><hi rend="italic">die bezeichnendsten
			musikalischen Gedanken</hi><hi xml:space="preserve">]’ running
			‘through the whole opera like a red thread, thus establishing a
			far higher level of musical unity than can be achieved by the
			mere juxtaposition of a variety of individual closed musical
			numbers’. Theodor Uhlig, ‘Drei Tage in Weimar’ (1850), in
			</hi><hi rend="italic">Musikalische Schriften</hi><hi
			xml:space="preserve">, ed. Ludwig Frankenstein (Regensburg:
			Bosse, 1913), 333. Wagner himself appeals to the idea of his
			composition as fabric, as we shall see, when he names the
			</hi><hi rend="italic">Formgewebe</hi><hi xml:space="preserve">
			[formal weave or texture] in </hi><hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi><hi xml:space="preserve">, but seems
			to have rejected the notion of his themes as ‘threads’, perhaps
			because he was made uneasy by the thought of his works as
			complex and confusing labyrinths. Franz Liszt, in writing about
			</hi><hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> just after the premiere in
			1850, evokes yet another suggestive metaphor when he speaks of
			‘one of these arterial phrases’ [<hi rend="italic">une de ces
			phrases artères</hi>]. Franz Liszt, <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin
			et Tannhäuser de Richard Wagner</hi> in<hi rend="italic">
			Sämtliche Schriften</hi>, 4:47, cited in Grey, ‘Ein rother
			Faden’, 205.  Interestingly, Liszt speaks of Wagner’s [unnamed]
			themes in his 1851 text, whereas in version published in 1881 he
			is naming ‘motifs’, clearly in tow to the later leitmotif
			tradition, as pointed out in 2003 by Christian Thorau in <hi
			rend="italic">Semantisierte Sinnlichkeit, </hi>45, as cited in
			David Trippett, ‘<hi rend="italic">Lohengrin </hi>at the Weimar
			Hoftheater: the Politics of a Premiere, <hi rend="italic"
			xml:space="preserve">Journal of the American Liszt Society
			</hi>(2011), 144.</p></note> Motifs and themes
			elaborated in ‘the richest orchestral language’ [<hi rend="italic">die
			allerreichste Orchestersprache</hi>] can’t <hi rend="italic">lead</hi> to those
			emotions or objects because, according to Wagner, ‘they are not
			to be heard at all [<hi rend="italic">gar nicht gehört zu werden</hi>], to wit,
			not in their mechanical presence but only in their organic
			operative effect [<hi rend="italic">Wirksamkeit</hi>] at one with the
			drama’.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn11" n="11"><p>Richard Wagner, <hi
			rend="italic">DS</hi>, 8:364.</p></note>
			</p>
			<p>If we take a sober look at just this sample of authorial
			statements – avoiding the lens of the subsequent ‘leitmotif’
			tradition –, it is plain to see that Wagner is (at least) of two
			minds about his musical tags and their relation to the drama. In
			the first, characteristic motifs are an intoxicant that precedes
			the scripting of verse and beguile him via their significance to
			a dramatic subject. In the second, presentiment and reminiscence
			motifs played by in the orchestra participate in the dramatic
			expression but originate in the verse melody and are seemingly
			subordinate to it. Even here we can see that it will be
			fruitless to harmonise Wagner’s own ideas into one all-embracing
			definition. Some scholars have tried to solve this problem by
			restricting the term ‘leitmotif’ only from the initial
			composition of the <hi rend="italic">Ring des Nibelungen</hi> in 1853 through to
			<hi rend="italic">Parsifal</hi> in 1882, but as Wagner’s views continue to
			evolve, it becomes clear that a focus on ‘leitmotifs’ not only
			misrepresents the composer’s thoughts and actions but is also
			hopelessly crude in trying to understand music composed over
			more than 40 years.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn12" n="12"><p>
			One reads in Frank E. Kirby, <hi rend="italic">Wagner’s Themes:
			A study in musical expression</hi> (Warren, Michigan: Harmonie
			Park Press, 2004), 16, that ‘Wagner has provided us with an
			adequate account of his themes – his Leitmotivs, their nature,
			and how they function in his dramatic works’ so one can
			therefore undertake a structural and taxonomic reading of all of
			them, <hi rend="italic">not an historical account</hi> [emphasis
			added]. But as John Deathridge notes, ‘posterity has continued
			to understand Wagner’s famous system of leitmotifs’ in terms of
			[the] method [formulated for the <hi rend="italic">Ring</hi>]
			alone, without realizing … that it was invented specifically for
			the <hi rend="italic">Ring</hi>. The truth is that the method is
			qualitatively very different from the motifs used in <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>, and different, too, from the
			methods he was to develop later in <hi
			rend="italic">Tristan</hi>, <hi rend="italic">Die
			Meistersinger</hi>, and <hi rend="italic">Parsifal</hi>, not to
			mention the later parts of the ><hi rend="italic">Ring</hi>
			itself’. Deathridge, <hi rend="italic">Wagner Beyond Good
			and Evil</hi>, 39.</p></note></p>
			<p>Given, then, the <hi rend="italic">misleading</hi> implications of the
			‘leading motif’, it’s tempting to ask the forbidden question:
			why not abandon the word<hi rend="italic"> leitmotif</hi> in
			discussing Wagner? Would it not be preferable to view Wagner’s
			musical recurrences without the burdensome baggage of a flawed
			concept? The advantages seem clear. We could study the ways that
			Wagner deployed his repeating motifs and themes over the course
			of his career by taking one stage work at a time instead of
			viewing them all through one unfocussed lens. Without the
			spectre of the ‘leitmotif’, we might also better understand
			Wagner’s obsession with forms of recurrence heard first in his
			early stage works (such as <hi rend="italic">Das Liebesverbot</hi> of 1834)
			which still make an appearance in his final
			‘stage-consecration-festival-play’ <hi rend="italic">Parsifal</hi> of 1882. By
			stopping the clock at each artistic juncture and assessing its
			synchronic state of play, one can ultimately construct a more
			compelling narrative of how, over the course of his life, Wagner
			sought varied ways to bind music to language, image, gesture and
			feeling.</p>
		</div>
		<div>
			<head>Lohengrin’s forbidden question</head>
			<p>The current essay makes a modest start by focussing on the
			recurring thematic strands in Wagner’s last ‘Romantic’ opera
			<hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> (1846-49) and begins with the so-called
			<hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>. (References to musical themes and motifs
			in this essay are set in reduced-sized capitals.)
			<hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> is invaluable as an initial case study, since
			it precedes by just a few years the composer’s theoretical
			struggles in <hi rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi> (1851) that launched
			his monumental <hi rend="italic">Ring</hi> composition. Though the density of
			thematic reiterations in <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> is less striking than
			in the later works, musical recurrences are still fundamental to
			the overall dramaturgy from the very first bars of the Prelude
			till the final moments of Act III. The opera, moreover, displays
			examples of thematic processes – by my count there are 14
			structural motifs and themes that recur beyond an appearance in
			just one scene –that Wagner borrowed for the <hi rend="italic">Ring</hi> through
			to <hi rend="italic">Parsifal</hi>. </p>
			<p>In a letter from 1850, moreover, Wagner even makes a concrete
			reference to the centrality of his motifs to the composition of
			Lohengrin. Complaining about potential cuts in the score to the
			producer Eduard Genast, the composer writes:</p>
			<quote rend="block">I wish I hadn't known the cuts you were planning to make. For
			every one of them I would know and probably convincingly explain
			to you how painfully you injure my artistic sense of honour. I
			ask you, with what feelings, with what prematurely sapped
			enthusiasm should I next start creating a musical drama again
			<hi rend="bold">when working out the most deeply felt and most
			necessarily essential motifs </hi>[emphasis added] when I have
			to recall the passages from <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> which my best
			friends thought could be omitted?<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn13" n="13"><p>‘Ich hätte gewünscht, die von Ihnen
			beabsichtigten Kürzungen nicht kennen zu lernen. An jeder von
			ihnen wüßte ich Ihnen und wahrscheinlich überzeugend darzulegen,
			wie schmerzlich Sie mein künstlerisches Ehrgefühl
			verletzt. [sic] Ich frage Sie, mit welchem Gefühle, mit welcher
			im voraus geknickten Begeisterung soll ich mich nächstens wieder
			an die Composition eines musikalischen Dramas machen, wenn ich
			bei Ausführung der wohlempfundensten und als notwendigst
			erachteten Motive mich der Stellen aus Lohengrin entsinnen muß,
			die meine besten Freunde für auslassungsmöglich gehalten haben?‘
			Eduard Genast, <hi rend="italic">Aus dem Tagebuch eines alten
			Schauspielers</hi>, Part 4 (Leipzig: Voigt &amp; Günther, 1866),
			141-42. <ref
			target="https://reader.digitale-sammlungen.de/de/fs3/object/display/bsb10573906_00154.html?contextType=scan&amp;contextSort=score%2Cdescending&amp;contextRows=10&amp;zoom=0.55&amp;context=Lohengrin">https://reader.digitale-sammlungen.de/de/fs3/object/display/bsb10573906_00154.html?contextType=scan&amp;contextSort=score%2Cdescending&amp;contextRows=10&amp;zoom=0.55&amp;context=Lohengrin</ref></p></note></quote>
			<p>So a focus on these ‘deeply felt and most necessarily motifs’
			in <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> helps us confront not only a crucial element
			in this one opera, but the composer himself at a crucial stage
			in his artistic development. </p>
			<p>The entire plot of the opera <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> famously turns
			on a forbidden question that the protagonist Elsa must not
			ask. The striking music for the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> is unmistakeable and stands
			out from its first occurrence. How, though, does the music of
			the passage relate to its text? A closer look is in
			order. First, to the text since we can’t know whether Wagner
			conceived of the music or the text first. Soon after his
			appearance in Act I, Lohengrin tells Elsa: ‘Never shall you ask
			me, nor trouble yourself to know where I came from, my name, or
			my ancestry!’ In English one refers to a ‘forbidden question’
			because it is awkward to translate the German
			<hi rend="italic">Frageverbot</hi>: literally, ‘a question-prohibition’. In
			German, however, the semantic emphasis lies on the ‘prohibition’
			or ‘ban’, not the question. The distinction is germane since
			Lohengrin has banned the question in the form of a command
			issued in the imperative. Yet in Wagner’s original prose draft,
			Elsa never comes to ask a question. Instead, she issues
			statements in the imperative – <hi rend="italic">Ich muss es wissen, Dein Name
			– Deine Heimath … – Nenne</hi> [‘I must know it, your name, your
			homeland, name (it)’]. Even in the final version of the poem,
			she <hi rend="italic">demands</hi> – and never queries – knowledge she
			desires. Wagner was surely troubled by the inconsistency, for in
			the end he added question marks to her last two commands: <hi rend="italic">Den
			Namen sag’ mir an!</hi> [Tell me your name!], <hi rend="italic">Woher die
			Fahrt?’</hi> [‘Where did the journey come from?’], <hi rend="italic">Wie deine
			Art?</hi> [And your ancestry?],<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn14" n="14"><p>Even in the first version of the poem,
			there were two exclamation points and only one question
			mark. Compare Wagner, <hi rend="italic">SW</hi> 26:276 and <hi
			rend="italic">SW</hi> 26:329.</p></note> and actually ‘composed out’
			the final question mark in the music: on the word <hi rend="italic">Art</hi>
			[ancestry] Elsa jumps to a high B natural to evoke the upwards
			intonation of her spoken interrogative<hi rend="italic">.</hi><note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn15" n="15"><p>Wagner’s prose draft hadn’t
			yet worked out the rhymes between <hi
			rend="italic">befragen</hi>/<hi rend="italic">tragen</hi> and
			<hi rend="italic">Fahrt</hi>/<hi rend="italic">Art</hi>, and is
			far clearer in its meaning: ‘Never shall you ask me nor ever
			seek to know who I am and where I come from’. See Wagner, <hi
			rend="italic">SW</hi> 26:213.</p></note> </p>
			<p><hi rend="italic">What</hi> Elsa was barred from asking was clear from the
			prohibition: name, place and ancestry (or origin or tribe). Yet
			the absence of a clear formulation is all the more curious when
			one confronts the text to <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>, which is littered
			with references to the ‘forbidden question’: Elsa promises never
			to ask it, Ortrud and Friedrich mention it repeatedly, and in
			his Grail narration, Lohengrin ‘rewards the forbidden question’
			with an answer [<hi rend="italic">wie ich verbotener Frage lohne</hi>]. But as
			we can see from all of Wagner’s textual revisions marking the
			moment when Elsa finally ‘asks’ it, a direct question was never
			posed. The key dramatic motive was instead the proclamation of
			the question’s prohibition.</p>
			<p> This distinction may seem academic until we inspect the
			pregnant musical phrases of the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> (or Question-Ban) itself. For
			if we listen to the music that Lohengrin sings, it is clear that
			Wagner composed it as a command, not a question. Let’s take a
			closer look at the first time Wagner sounds the passage, <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F1"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 1</link>, whose music covers the
			four lines of verse. (See the <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> TimeMachine.)
			Lohengrin has arrived to aid a damsel in distress – wrongly
			accused of murdering her brother – and offers his protection to
			defend her on one condition, namely that she never ask about his
			true identity:</p>
			<foreign>
				<lg>
					<l class="x-segment">Nie sollst du mich befragen,</l>
					<l class="-x-segment">noch Wissens Sorge tragen,</l>
					<l class="y-segment" label="y">woher ich kam der Fahrt,</l>
					<l>noch wie mein Nam’ und Art!</l>
				</lg>
			</foreign>
			<lg>
				<l class="x-segment">Never shall you ask me,</l>
				<l class="-x-segment">Nor desire to know,</l>
				<l class="y-segment" label="y"><hi rend="italic">Where I came from</hi></l>
				<l>Nor my name and kind!</l>
			</lg>
			<p>At the same time that Wagner the composer ‘declaims’ his text
			with one note per syllable, he also encodes the musical setting
			with signs of a divinely authoritative utterance, as if
			engraving it in stone. The theme lasts for 8 bars and consists
			of a repeated two-bar antecedent phrase (segment x) and a
			consequent phrase of four bars (segment y).  (The textual
			example above shows how the musical segments set the four lines
			of the text, with the y-segment covering two lines.) Wagner
			conjures his command in the negative not only by lengthening the
			monosyllabic words for ‘never’ [<hi rend="italic">Nie</hi>] and ‘nor’
			[<hi rend="italic">noch</hi>] in the x-segments but by repeating the identical
			pitches, rhythms and dynamics in the first two lines of text all
			over an unchanging harmony or chord of A flat minor. (This kind
			of exact musical repetition is so artificial and, as it were,
			musically primitive, that it is experienced as something
			motionless, stationary, petrified, and therefore stone-like.)
			The notated accents in the vocal line likewise seem chiseled
			into the text. The harmony of the x-segment, so riveted by an
			unchanging chord, that it grips the words in a tight vise, and
			in the repetition of the x-segment, the woodwinds shine a
			glaring light on the pronouncement, which only highlights its
			immobility.  This music forms the underpinning for Lohengrin’s
			heavily accented voice enunciating the verbal command which seem
			therefore to issue from a statuesque figure evoking an oracular
			authority.</p>
			<p>Every sign of softness is ruthlessly suppressed from the
			x-segment. For example, Lohengrin avoids the appoggiaturas (or
			leaning notes) that so often grace Wagner’s vocal
			lines. Instead, the apodictic tone of the x-segment melody
			relentlessly hammers out the three elemental pitches of the
			minor triad A flat, C flat and E flat (with only two passing
			tones between them). Compared to lyrical themes connected to
			Elsa later in the opera – such as <hi
			rend="small-caps">Feierliches Geleit</hi> [Solemn Procession] or
			<hi rend="small-caps">Elsas gesegneter Schritt</hi> [Elsa’s
			Blessed Gait] <hi>–</hi> the melodic style of the x-segment of
			the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot </hi>with its striking
			absence of appoggiaturas appears especially bald and
			unadorned. Its harshness depends on ciphers that signal a
			command to be obeyed. The harmonic stasis in the orchestra which
			refuses to move insists – cleverly – on <hi rend="italic">inaction</hi>, crying
			out: ‘Don’t do it!’<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn16"
			n="16"><p>Wagner seems to be appealing to and updating the
			appearance of similar operatic oracles such as the Commendatore
			in the penultimate scene of Mozart’s Don Giovanni, when the
			ghostly apparition sings <hi rend="italic">Dammi la mano in
			pegno!</hi> [Give me your hand in pledge!] in a near monotone
			over an unchanging ostinato in the
			orchestra.</p></note></p>
			<p>In the y-segment, however – where the text spells out what
			Elsa mustn’t ask – the musical register suddenly veers from the
			imperative to the homiletic, from shouting an order to preaching
			a moral lesson. Lohengrin’s vocal accents vanish and the harmony
			in the orchestra wanders through a shifting tonal course (VI<hi
			rend="superscript">6</hi> – VI – III – IV – V<hi
			rend="figures"><hi rend="num">6</hi><hi rend="den">4</hi> <hi
			rend="num">5</hi><hi rend="den">3</hi></hi> – I<hi
			rend="superscript">#</hi>) as if singing a chorale. These
			harmonies underlie the details of the ‘ban’ and traverse six
			diatonic scale-degrees (<hi rend="italic">Stufen</hi>) of A flat
			minor. But unlike the daunting oracular voice of the x-segment,
			the y-segment softens the message with the addition of two new
			‘speakers’ – the first flute and first oboe – who shadow
			Lohengrin’s melody.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn17"
			n="17"><p>That is, the solo winds double the voice apart from
			two demisemiquavers (32<hi rend="superscript">nd</hi> notes)
			that repeat pitches so as to approximate the German prosody (<hi
			rend="italic">wohér ich kám</hi>). They also omit the repeated
			note that Lohengrin sings on his final conjunction ‘and’ [<hi
			rend="italic">und</hi>]. </p></note> Written imperatives require
			an exclamation point at the end, and Wagner even ‘composes’ the
			punctuation with a so-called <hi rend="italic">tierce de
			Picardie</hi> or raised major third. While the progression of
			the y-segment is conventional with all pitches native to A flat
			minor, it also embeds (between the second and third sonorities)
			a subtle plagal cadence (IV – I in C flat major) thereby hinting
			at a comforting ‘Amen’. The aura of the plagal figure recalls
			the ‘holy’ Grail kingdom from which Lohengrin has hailed in the
			same way that one finds a classical ‘Amen’ appended to the end
			of the <hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> [Grail] theme in the
			final bars of the first-Act Prelude.</p>
			<p>With its undulating melodic contours, the y-segment
			highlights the gentle side of Lohengrin’s character first
			exhibited after his striking arrival onstage, where, instead of
			striking a heroic pose, the Grail knight bids farewell to his
			‘dear swan’. (The <hi rend="italic">piano </hi>dynamic, the
			<hi rend="italic">legato</hi> articulation, and the keys of A/A flat are common
			to both <hi rend="small-caps">Schwan </hi>[Swan] and the
			y-segment of the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>.) So
			while the text of the prohibition sticks to one literary
			register, the musical setting changes style between segments x
			and y. The upshot is that the music does far more than reflect
			the ‘ban’: rather, it heightens the textual rhetoric and
			impregnates it with associations <hi rend="italic">extraneous</hi> to the text,
			thereby expanding its semantic content. Even with its
			rudimentary musical materials, the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> is rich in semantic signals
			already at its first appearance. It seems designed as one of
			those fragrant ‘characteristic motifs’ which has the intoxicated
			the composer as he crafts a web of interrelated and contrasting
			musical images.</p>
		</div>
		<div>
			<p>But was the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> a motif?
			Surely the music is far too long to for that. Extended over an
			8-bar melodic period, it is surely a fully-fledged theme. Or
			perhaps a theme comprised of two motifs, the reiterated
			x-segment and the longer y-segment. Though Wagner never approved
			of the word ‘leitmotif’, we find him referring to both ‘motifs’
			[<hi rend="italic">Motive</hi>] and ‘themes’ [<hi rend="italic">Themen</hi>] in his writings
			at the time of <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>. And if he distinguished in his
			own mind between types of recurrent passages, this typology
			hammers yet another nail in the coffin for the ‘leitmotif’. To
			put it another way, the term ‘leitmotif’ fails miserably on two
			accounts. It doesn’t lead, and it isn’t always a motif.</p>
			<p>It’s worth dwelling on how the word ‘motif’ and ‘theme’ were
			used in the 19<hi rend="superscript">th</hi> century so as to
			work out what Wagner meant by them. In an important book on
			Wagner and Beethoven, for example, Klaus Kropfinger claims that
			Wagner used motifs and themes as interchangeable synonyms,<note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn18" n="18"><p> Klaus Kropfinger, <hi
			rendition="simple:italic">Wagner and Beethoven: Richard Wagner’s
			reception of Beethoven</hi>, trans. Peter Palmer (Cambridge,
			CUP, 1991), 91.</p></note> but this judgment seems too
			hasty. As it happens, the word ‘motif’ was just undergoing a
			shift in meaning in the 1840s as a result of the influential
			theories of Adolf Bernhard Marx, who in his <hi rend="italic">Theory of Musical
			Composition</hi> (1837) had famously focused attention on
			Beethoven’s melodic cells – such as the one opening his Fifth
			Symphony – to which he assigned the specific word ‘motif’
			[<hi rend="italic">Motiv</hi>]. As Marx put it:</p>
			<quote rend="block">Those short expressions, which contain the
			seed and <hi rend="italic">thrust</hi> of a composition that grows out of them,
			we call ‘motifs’. Any union of two or more notes can count as a
			motif; the content of every musical formation, we could say,
			consists of such motifs, and we must observe how these cells are
			maintained, used and <hi rend="italic">duplicated</hi> so as to offer us ever
			new phrases, progressions and periods.<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn19" n="19"><p>
			<hi rend="italic">Solche Formeln, welche den Keim
			und Trieb eines aus ihnen hervorwachsenden Satzes enthalten,
			wollen wir Motive nennen. Jede Vereinigung von zwei oder mehr
			Tönen kann als Motiv gelten; in solchen Motiven, können wir
			sagen, besteht der Inhalt aller Tongebilde, und wir müssen
			betrachten, wie diese Keime zu hegen, zu benutzen, zu
			vervielfältigen sind, um uns stets neue Sätze, Gänge und
			Perioden zu gewähren.</hi> Adolf
			Bernhard Marx, <hi rendition="simple:italic">Lehre von der
			musikalischen Komposition</hi>
			(Leipzig, 1837), I:2</p></note></quote>
			<p>Yet not every musician and theorist followed Marx in his
			definition of ‘motif’ as a short musical unit. For example,
			Johann Christian Lobe notes several years later in his own
			<hi rend="italic">Compositions-Lehre</hi> (1844):</p>
			<quote rend="block">The word ‘motif’ in the language of
			art-music is so used by many people in a broader sense in that
			they designate by it an entire melody, namely, a theme. As far
			as I know, it was the estimable B.A. Marx [sic] who repeatedly
			proposed the limitation of [a motif’s] meaning to the small and
			smallest components in which a melody can be dismantled, or out
			of which it can be assembled.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn20"
			n="20"><p>‘<hi rend="italic">Das Wort Motiv wird in der
			musikalischen Kunstsprache von Vielen in einem weiteren Sinne so
			gebraucht, dass sie darunter eine ganze Melodie, namentlich ein
			Thema verstehen. Die Beschränkung seiner Bedeutung auf die
			kleinen und kleinsten Theile, in welche eine Melodie zerlegt,
			oder aus welchen sie zusammengesetzt werden kann, hat, meines
			Wissens, der um die Compositionslehre in vielfachen Beziehungen
			hochverdiente B. A. Marx </hi>[sic]<hi rend="italic">
			aufgestellt.</hi>’ Johann Christian Lobe, <hi
			rend="italic">Compositions-Lehre oder umfassende Theorie
			von der thematischen Arbeit und den modernen Instrumentalformer,
			aus den Werken der besten Meister entwickelt und durch die
			mannichfaltigsten </hi>[sic] <hi
			rend="italic">Beispiele erklärt</hi> (Weimar, 1844), 15.</p></note></quote>
			<p>So from Lobe it follows that, while motif and theme had been
			hitherto synonymous in general usage, those influenced by the
			‘estimable’ Marx now had access to a more restricted meaning for
			motif. And it must surely have been the authority of Beethoven’s
			practice – especially from his middle period – of composing
			music based on the ‘duplication’ of short melodic cells rather
			than full-blown melodies that made Marx’s definition valuable,
			if not indispensable. Indeed, what Marx did was no more than
			assign the name ‘motif’ to a clear but hitherto undefined
			musical micro-object that had a long history but lacked a clear
			term. That such a thing existed can never have been in doubt,
			whether it was observed in the ‘development’ section of the
			Mozart’s 40<hi rend="superscript">th</hi> Symphony
			(first movement) or at the opening of Beethoven’s Fifth: no one
			could have called just three or four notes a ‘theme’. To
			recapitulate: by the mid-1840s, motifs could be a theme or a
			building block of a few pitches, but themes could never be short
			‘motifs’.</p>
			<p>Wagner’s friend Theodor Uhlig, with whom the composer was in
			close touch during the composition of <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>, seems
			also to have echoed this same distinction in a now-lost treatise
			called ‘The choice of motifs and the way to use them in larger
			instrumental compositions: a practical essay’ which Wagner
			esteemed and from which he also borrowed. Portions of the
			treatise found their way into an essay Uhlig later published in
			1852 in the <hi rend="italic">Neue Zeitschrift für Musik</hi>, where he also
			discusses the opening of the Beethoven 5<hi
			rend="superscript">th</hi>.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn21"
			n="21"><p>See Theodor Uhlig, ‚Die Wahl der Motive und die Art ihrer
			Ausführung in grösseren Instrumentalkomopositionen: eine
			praktische Abhandlung‘ <hi rend="italic">, Neue Zeitschrift für
			Musik</hi> 36 (1852), 28 as cited in Klaus Kropfinger’s
			commentary on Wagner’s <hi rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi>
			(Stuttgart: Philipp Reclam Jun., 1984), 414-15 [hereafter <hi
			rend="italic">O&amp;D</hi> (Kropf)].</p></note> Unlike Marx who
			restricted ‘motif’ to designate the first four notes, Uhlig
			proposed that Beethoven’s opening consists of ‘a short motif of
			four bars’ [sic], with the opening four notes being merely ‘one
			of the single pieces of the motif’ [<hi rend="italic">die einzelnen Stücke des
			Motivs</hi>]. Uhlig’s smallest melodic unit is there the ‘piece’
			or <hi rend="italic">Stück</hi> which, when cobbled together out of several
			<hi rend="italic">Stücke</hi>, forms a larger motif. </p>
			<p>Wagner, on the other hand, doesn’t copy Uhlig, but rather
			prefers a distinction between ‘theme’ and ‘motif’ all his own,
			at least at the time of <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>. Closer to Marx in
			some ways, Wagner uses ‘motif’ as a musical item shorter than a
			theme, even if it signals a unit longer than just a few
			notes. We glimpse this usage in a letter he wrote to Uhlig about
			<hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> from 1851. Here the composer reflects on
			analyzing his own music, and suggests that Uhlig publish an
			analysis of <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>:</p>
			<quote rend="block">The business of the
			vocal score prompted me to take a quick look through the music
			of <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> again. Since you sometimes write about
			these things, wouldn’t you be interested in saying something
			about the thematic fabric of form [<hi rend="italic">das thematische
			Formgewebe</hi>] and how, in the direction I’ve chosen to go, it
			must constantly create new forms? Among other things, this
			occurred to me when I looked at the first scene of the second
			act. At the start of the second scene – the prelude with the
			wind instruments accompanying Elsa’s entrance onto the balcony –
			I noticed how in the seventh, eighth and ninth bars accompanying
			Elsa’s nocturnal appearance <hi rend="italic">a motif</hi> [emphasis added] is
			heard for the first time, which, fully formed [<hi rend="italic">ganz
			ausgebildet</hi>], later comes to a spacious and broad fruition
			[<hi rend="italic">breit und hell zur Ausführung kommt</hi>] when Elsa moves in
			broad daylight and full brilliance toward the church. I clearly
			saw from this how <hi rend="italic">my themes</hi> [emphasis added] always come
			into being in context, and in keeping with the character of a
			vivid image [<hi rend="italic">nach dem Character einer plastischen
			Erscheinung</hi>].<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn22" n="22"><p>
			<hi rend="italic">SB</hi>, IV:241. Translation adapted from
			Deathridge, <hi rend="italic">Beyond Good and
			Evil</hi>, 38-39. It is Deathridge who
			drew attention to Wagner’s interest in the publication of
			analytical texts treating his music in the letter to Uhlig,
			which flies in the face of Wagner’s later emphasis in <hi
			rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi> on a more intuitive grasp of his
			musico-dramatic processes that Wagner called <hi
			rend="italic">Gefühlsverständnis</hi> or emotional understanding. In his
			doctoral thesis, ‘Wagner’s ‘Emotional Understanding’: a Critical
			Appraisal of the Concept of Leitmotiv’ (University of Oxford,
			2017), Christian von Goldbeck treats this latter concept in the
			context of Wagner’s writings.</p></note></quote>
			<p>Here one finds references to a ‘motif’ and to ‘themes’, and
			Kropfinger could be forgiven for concluding that the terms are
			synonyms. However, a closer inspection of the relevant music
			suggests that Wagner could not have used the word ‘theme’ for
			the first appearance of the motif he is describing. The passage
			he cites from <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>, Act II/ii accompanies Elsa’s
			entrance onto the balcony. The music, for Wagner a ‘motif, is
			only three bars long, and he doesn’t give it a name. After the
			‘motif’ is ‘fully formed’ and ‘undergoes spacious and broad
			development’ in Act II/iv, it becomes a ‘theme’. Surely this is
			due to the new lyrical upbeat of three quavers and to the
			expansion of the motif into a classical ‘quadratic’ structure of
			4 + 4 bars: each phrase begins with its own antecedent before
			resolving on a full cadence on the downbeat b.9. So whereas
			Wagner’s definition of a musical motif indicated a concise
			musical statement longer than just a few notes – here three bars
			long – , motif was also the <hi rend="italic">wrong</hi> word for a fully
			fleshed-out melody at least the ‘size’ of a complete periodic
			phrase.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn23" n="23"><p>Perhaps this
			is one reason why Wagner started calling motifs and themes
			‘melodic moments’ as well as ‘musical motifs’ in <hi
			rend="italic">Opera and Drama</hi> (1851), though it’s
			interesting that in his private correspondence at the just the
			same time he’s still only referring to motifs and themes.  One
			sees this distinction much later as well. In one of Cosima
			Wagner’s diary entries from much later (5 December 1877)
			regarding the composition of <hi rend="italic">Parsifal</hi>,
			Wagner still distinguishes between motif and theme on the basis
			of size: ‘Richard says he has concocted a fine mélange for the
			esquires as they remove the dead swan: Amfortas’s theme,
			Herzeleide’s theme and the swan motif from <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>.’ Here it is still clear that the
			two chords (vi – I) that comprise in both <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> and <hi rend="italic">Parsifal</hi>
			are too short to be called a theme. Both <hi
			rend="small-caps">Amfortas</hi> and <hi
			rend="small-caps">Herzeleide</hi> in <hi
			rend="italic">Parsifal</hi> are both full-sized phrases. A few
			months later (4 June 1878) Wagner describes the ‘shattering
			effect’ of the music that accompanies Kundry’s kiss as ‘the
			fatal motif of love’s longing creeps like poison through the
			blood [<hi rend="italic">das tödliche wie Gift schlängelnde
			Motiv der Liebessehnsucht</hi>]’. Again, the musical content of
			<hi rend="small-caps">Liebessehnsucht</hi>[Love’s Yearning]
			comprises a repeatable figure laid over just two
			chords. Perhaps, then, Wagner maintained this subtle distinction
			between motif and theme throughout his life, yet another reason
			why he was hostile to the word <hi rend="italic">Leitmotiv
			</hi>as an overriding concept. <hi rend="italic">Cosima Wagner’s
			Diaries</hi>, eds. Martin Gregor-Dellin and Dietrich Mack,
			trans. Geoffrey Skelton (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
			1980), I:1002 and II:85.</p></note> One possibility is that Wagner,
			under the influence of Marx, had parted with the term
			‘characteristic motif’ cited in the letter to Gaillard (1844),
			since he could now make use of a semantic distinction to signal
			a compositional process, as found in the Uhlig letter, in which
			he transformed a motif into a theme.<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn24" n="24"><p>By the time of ><hi rend="italic">Oper und
			Drama</hi>, Wagner used the term <hi
			rend="italic">musikalisch-dramatische Charakteristik</hi> mostly
			as a term of abuse for music – such as Giacomo Meyerbeer’s –
			that was ‘frivolous and without content’. <hi
			rend="italic">O&amp;D</hi> (Kropf) (Part I, chapter 5),
			84. According to Kropfinger (409), Wagner was reacting
			negatively to the article ‘Opera’ in the encyclopaedia <hi
			rend="italic">Die Gegenwart</hi> (1850) that speaks of the
			‘advantageously dramatic characteristic’ found in opera. Wagner
			surely stopped using the word in its previously positive sense
			once he came to voice his criticism of contemporary
			opera.</p></note> In this sense, the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> was – for Wagner – a theme
			and not a motif. (And though it remains to be confirmed, it
			seems that Wagner maintained the motif-theme distinction for the
			rest of his life.)</p>
			<p>What Wagner calls his ‘thematic fabric of form’ or ‘thematic
			web’ [<hi rend="italic">das thematische Formgewebe</hi>] must surely comprise
			all the significant motifs and themes in the opera. Identified
			as a hallmark of his personal approach – ‘in the direction I’ve
			chosen to go’ – this ‘web’ or ‘fabric’ was construed as a
			metaphorical weave comprising all those passages of music which
			are varied – ‘create new forms’ – at some temporal distance from
			their original statement. At least this description of the web
			follows from the example Wagner cites and would exclude thematic
			materials found only in one scene, since he is taking pains to
			distinguish what is novel in his approach as opposed to
			conventional thematic repetition and coherence in a traditional
			opera aria. The formal fabric is thematic since some of its
			musical threads or components are too long to be called
			motivic. At the same time, the word ‘theme’ seems to embrace
			smaller musical items called motifs, as when Wagner muses on
			‘how his themes come into being’, having begun as
			‘motifs’. Finally, it’s important to note that Wagner never
			speaks about the repetition of themes, but rather how they are
			subjected to ‘new’ and developing ‘forms’.</p>
			<p>The ‘new forms’ of themes and motifs also include – and are
			not distinct from – their harmonic underpinnings, since Wagner
			notes a musical passage in the Uhlig letter in which ‘the wind
			instruments accompany Elsa’s entrance onto the balcony’. Marx
			had explicitly excluded harmony from his view of ‘motif’, as
			does the tradition of motivic analysis that arose from it. This
			means that for Wagner the chordal progressions that ground the
			<hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> as well as the passage
			referred to in the Uhlig letter are fundamental to their
			sense. Near the very end of <hi rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi> (1851), when
			emphasizing how the poetic seed is indispensable to the
			poetically-inclined musician (that is, himself!), Wagner
			contrives a new extended metaphor: ‘the poet sees his verse
			mirrored as a musical melody upon the harmonic sea’.<note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn25" n="25"><p><hi
			rend="italic">O&amp;D</hi> (Kropf), 391.</p></note> Harmony – a
			large ocean [<hi rend="italic">Meer</hi>] – buoys melody as a reflected vessel
			on its surface and it would be foolish not to realise that the
			ship sails in water. The fact that the ocean’s waters are always
			in flux seems, moreover, an apt way to capture the perpetual
			harmonic transformations of Wagner’s themes and motifs. And when
			later (1879)) criticising Wolzogen’s ‘leitmotifs’ for their
			neglect of ‘musical syntax’ [<hi rend="italic">den musikalischen
			Satzbau</hi>],Wagner was surely also complaining that their
			identifications neglected both harmony and its transformations.
			</p>
		</div>
		<div>
			<head>Elsa’s Blessed Gait</head>
			<p>The tradition of Wolzogen’s leitmotifs falls into yet another
			unfortunate snare when it traps us into accepting one or another
			assigned and fixed verbal designation, often ignoring the
			motif’s musical content as well as its expansion at a later
			occurrence. Returning to his motif from Act II/ii that later
			becomes ‘fully formed’ as a theme in Act II/iv, Wagner describes
			its sense linked to ‘the nature of a vivid image’. Early
			Wagnerian commentators – anxious to assign names to ‘motifs’
			that aped Wolzogen’s practice for the <hi rend="italic">Ring</hi> and
			<hi rend="italic">Parsifal</hi> – have called this one ‘the bliss of love motif’
			[<hi rend="italic">Liebesglück-Motiv</hi>]<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn26"
			n="26"><p> See the motif list and table by Carl Waack (1861-1922)
			in Richard Wagner, <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>, <hi
			rend="italic">Klavierauszug</hi>, ed. Otto Singer (Leipzig:
			Breitkopf und Härtel, 1914).</p></note> or ‘the consecration of love
			theme’ [<hi rend="italic">Liebesweihthema</hi>].<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn27" n="27"><p><hi rend="italic">Das Buch der Motive aus
			Opern und Musikdramen Richard Wagner’s</hi>, ed. Lothar
			Windsperger (Mainz: Schott: 1920). Windsperger puts the expanded
			version from Act II/iv into the list of motifs rather than the
			first version in Act II/ii, as if Wagner intentionally
			foreshortened his idea as a premonition or <hi
			rend="italic">Ahnung</hi> rather than as endowing a short
			‘motif’ with a new and extended form.</p></note> Both names,
			invented out of whole cloth, portray the music’s affect by a
			characterization of a specific moment in the drama. Accordingly
			the leitmotif is always made beholden to an initial dramatic
			action that will be recalled when it is heard later: since Elsa
			is happy in her love for Lohengrin whom she will marry, the
			solemn but optimistic music depicts the joy that accompanies her
			entrance in Act II/ii, which will then be referenced in Act
			II/iv.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn28" n="28"><p> The best
			treatment of this tradition of naming leitmotifs is found in
			Christian Thorau, <hi rend="italic">Semantisierte Sinnlichkeit:
			Studien zu Rezeption und Zeichenstruktur der Leitmotivtechnik
			Richard Wagners</hi>, Beihefte zum Archiv für Musikwissenschaft,
			50 (Stuttgart: Fritz Steiner Verlag, 2003). Ignoring evidence
			that Wagner not only named some motifs but also both
			characterised their sense (as in the cited letter to Uhlig and
			in the essay, <hi rend="italic">On the Application of Music to
			the Drama</hi> from 1879), Thorau’s meticulous study – rightly –
			relies on Wagner’s notion of ‘emotional understanding’ from <hi
			rend="italic">Opera and Drama</hi> to suggest that aesthetic
			immediacy in the encounter with Wagner is compromised by the
			leitmotif tradition of Wagnerism, even if he is indifferent to
			any documentary or philological method which might divine the
			intended the sense of Wagner’s themes.</p></note> </p>
			<p>Wagner had a rather different sense of these two passages of
			music. For if his letter to Uhlig is compared to the libretto
			and stage directions, one sees that his ideas are linked to
			specific gestures, which the music – not fixed in designation
			but subject to a variation principle – captures in the form of a
			sounding ‘image’ or ‘appearance’ [Erscheinung]. In the first
			iteration, the music ‘accompanies’ Elsa’s entrance. According to
			the stage direction, she has appeared ‘in a white robe’ and
			‘steps up to the balustrade’ [<hi rend="italic">sie tritt an die Brüstung</hi>]
			and leans her head on her hand.’ In Act II/iv after a long
			procession of women has emerged slowly onto another balcony,
			‘Elsa steps out in the procession; the nobles bare their heads
			respectfully’. And when the nobles and men begin to sing a
			choral accompaniment to this procession, they likewise speak of
			Elsa’s ‘blessed step’: </p>
			<foreign>
				<lg>
					<l>Gesegnet soll sie schreiten,</l>
					<l>die lang in Demut litt!</l>
					<l>Gott möge sie geleiten,</l>
					<l>Gott hüte ihren Schritt!</l>
				</lg>
			</foreign>
			<lg>
				<l>Blessed should she proceed,</l>
				<l>she who suffered long in humility!</l>
				<l>May God guide her,</l>
				<l>may God mind her step!</l>
			</lg>
			<p>Wagner has therefore characterised the motif in Act II/ii as
			an initial ‘stepping out’ of a guileless woman (as in the ‘white
			robe’) freed from her lamentations and grateful for love. She
			responds to the motif in precisely these terms. The motif has
			been orchestrated with a delicate group of solo woodwinds headed
			by the first clarinet whose pliant appoggiaturas contrast so
			starkly with the unadorned melodic style of the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>. This ‘vivid image’ of a
			noblewoman’s gait opens with an harmonic progression of <hi
			rend="bold">I – V</hi><hi rend="bold superscript">7</hi><hi
			rend="bold">– IV</hi><hi rend="bold superscript">6</hi> <hi
			rend="bold">– ii – V</hi><hi rend="bold figures"><hi
			rend="num">6</hi><hi rend="den">4</hi> <hi rend="
			num">5</hi><hi rend="den">3</hi></hi>. Leading to the
			dominant, the phrase is incomplete in harmonic terms, and Elsa
			offers an explanatory gloss to a non-thematic accompaniment just
			thereafter:</p>
			<foreign>
				<lg>
					<l>Euch Lüften, die mein Klagen</l>
					<l>so traurig oft erfüllt,</l>
					<l>Euch muß ich dankend sagen,</l>
					<l>wie sich mein Glück enthüllt.</l>
				</lg>
			</foreign>
			<lg>
				<l>You breezes, who so often</l>
				<l>swelled my sad lament,</l>
				<l>I must say thank you</l>
				<l>As my happiness unfolds.</l>
			</lg>
			<p>Only in in Act II/iv is the same music transformed into a
			more solemn procession of the female protagonist illuminated by
			an aura of bassoons and a bass clarinet supporting on the heavy
			accents, and with four horns gently pulsating off the beat. The
			harmony of the entire phrase is now complete in that it now
			closes in the tonic. The theme sounded by the violins – more
			magnificent in their warmth and plenitude than the solo winds –
			embodies ‘awe’, as in the ‘reverential’ [<hi
			rend="italic">ehrfurchtsvoll</hi>] baring of the nobles’ heads
			in the stage direction, while flutes and a bassoon further
			divide the beat by more opulent syncopes. The sense of the two
			bits of music are of course related, but the meaning has been
			transformed.</p>
			<p>No wonder, then, that Wagner failed to label the motif turned
			theme in his letter to Uhlig: on the one hand, both forms embody
			a crystallized depiction of a character’s mentality as well as
			the reaction of the chorus to a particular state of
			awe-inspiring grace. Even more importantly, since the music
			accumulates further associations (as in the procession) that
			deepens its experiential grasp, a single label misdirects
			attention toward a repetition designed for dramatic recall,
			which in this case is irrelevant. A label, moreover, would have
			betrayed what Wagner achieved by his expansion and variation of
			the musical material, what he referred to as his ‘constantly new
			forms’. Only for the sake of heuristic convenience, therefore,
			is it useful as a mnemonic to dub both the constellation of
			motif and theme <hi rend="small-caps">Elsas gesegneter
			Schritt</hi> [Elsa’s blessed gait].)</p>
		</div>
		<div>
			<head>Lohengrin’s forbidden question (continued)</head>
			<p> What Wagner termed these “constantly new forms” are also
			what categorise the recurrences of the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>. Originally in A flat and A
			minor in Act I – the realm associated with the Grail from the
			opening Prelude, the hoary downward transposition into F# minor
			associated with Ortrud’s music of disaster and sorcery
			immediately imprints her evil associations on the
			reminiscence. The question-ban of course remains an unfathomable
			mystery until the Grail narration, and only there, as we shall
			see (though in a section excised by the composer) does the
			explanation of the ban encourage Wagner to put a positive twist
			on the y-segment, as in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F18"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 18</link>.</p>
<!-- Weird para
			<p>Just before <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F5"><hi
			rend="small-caps">FRAGEVERBOT </hi>5</link>, Ortrud has taunted
			her husband Friedrich: ‘What would you give to know if I told
			you that if [Lohengrin were forced to name himself and his
			origin, all his power bestowed on him by magic is at an
			end. Although Ortrud’s supposition is in fact false – and the
			question-ban really regards Lohengrin’s ability to stay with
			Elsa and Gottfried’s service to the Grail – the orchestra in
			this case shudders to the A-minor statement of the x-fragment
			with tremolos in the strings, as Friedrich, desirous of revenge
			and shivering with the recognition, albeit false, that Lohengrin
			has used evil magic to defeat him, asserts that the question-ban
			was a necessary part of that magic.</p>Althogh
/ Weird para -->
			<p>Reminiscence, even when intended, differs from repetition,
			for recall can be construed in a variety of ways, and its
			context is crucial. Returning to the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>, Wagner broaches this
			question in a letter to Franz Liszt at the time of the <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> premiere conducted by Liszt in
			Weimar in 1850. Wagner assures Liszt that ‘the significance of
			the <hi rend="italic">fortissimo</hi> F-minor reminiscence of
			Lohengrin’s prohibition … has hitherto been clearly imprinted
			upon us’ [<hi rend="italic">im ff F-moll die reminiscenz von
			Lohengrin's Verbot … deren bedeutung bis hierher sich uns
			deutlich eingeprägt</hi> hat].<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn29" n="29"><p> <hi rend="italic">SB</hi> III:392</p></note>
			The passage in question refers to the statement of the theme in
			Act II/iv, signaled by <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F9"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 9</link> on the
			TimeMachine. Wagner seems to have heard that the curtain at a
			Weimar performance fell too soon at the end of Act II, and in
			his letter, insists that <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F9"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 9</link> must coincide with
			the moment (according to the stage direction) when Elsa sees
			that Ortrud ‘has raised her arm as if she were sure of
			victory’. Wagner’s letter even spells out the unspoken verbal
			content of Ortrud’s gesture. It means: ‘Just go in, you <hi
			rend="italic">shall</hi> flout the prohibition.’</p>
			<p>Yet this iteration of <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F9"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 9</link> doesn’t repeat
			Lohengrin’s prohibition so much as <hi rend="italic">issue a
			threat</hi> about the ban. To notice this shift is to pay
			attention to a subtle change in the x-segment. Instead of the
			<hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> leading off with a heavy
			downbeat, Wagner has added a little anticipatory upbeat before
			the first note, which immediately evokes the opening signal of a
			brass fanfare (da-dá). This additional upbeat even prevents the
			<hi rend="italic">recall</hi> of Lohengrin’s opening words – <hi
			rend="italic">Nie sollst du mich befragen –</hi>, which began
			with a strong accent on the word <hi rend="italic">Nie
			</hi>[Never]. The text of the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> therefore recede into the
			background, and the theme transforms itself instead as an
			orchestral fanfare of doom. It is as if a mighty instrumental
			choir taunts Elsa with a spiteful recollection of the promise
			she made. Note also the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>
			is no longer heard in Lohengrin’s region of A flat and A minor,
			summoning forth the holy Grail, but is transposed downwards into
			Ortrud’s realm located a third lower of F (and F sharp) minor.
			As one can see from the TimeMachine, Wagner maintains this
			threatening upbeat into the next two iterations found in
			Act III/ii – <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F10"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 10</link> and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F11">11</link> –
			even when the tonal realm shifts back to A minor for the duet
			between Lohengrin and Elsa leading to her fateful breach of the
			ban.</p>
			<p>In <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F10"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 10</link> Wagner signals this
			move from ban to threat when Elsa utters the very word <hi
			rend="italic">droht</hi> [threatens] on the downbeat of the
			motif: <hi rend="italic">kennt’ ich ein Sorgen, das dir
			droht!</hi> [‘would that I knew of a trouble that threatens
			you!’]. She has by now accepted Ortrud’s malicious insinuation
			that the prohibition is a secret [<hi rend="italic">ein
			Geheimnis</hi>] that endangers her lover, and by extension, her
			marriage. And in <hi>Frageverbot 11 </hi>Lohengrin reminds Elsa
			‘always to steer clear of doubt’ [<hi rend="italic">stets den
			Zweifel meiden</hi>] while an oboe, the <hi rend="italic">cor
			anglais</hi> and two clarinets hark back to that threatening
			doubt. Thereafter Wagner maintains his distinction between the
			two forms of the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> with and
			without a threatening upbeat: when the orchestra or Lohengrin
			recalls the original ban, the semiquaver is absent, as in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F12"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 12</link>, <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F13">13</link>
			and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17">17,</link>
			but when the orchestra recalls the effect of Ortrud’s evil on
			the prohibition (as in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F15"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 15</link> and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F16"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 16</link>) after Friedrich’s
			death, Wagner sounds the fanfare-like signal with the
			semiquaver. The distinction is remarkably subtle, and one
			wonders how many ardent Wagnerians have ever noticed
			it. Certainly this kind of variation plays no role in any guides
			to the leitmotifs. Even the composer shortchanges the effect of
			his threatening version of the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> when he names it as a
			‘reminiscence’ in his letter to Liszt!<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn30" n="30"><p>In <hi rend="italic">Oper und Drama</hi>,
			Wagner alludes obliquely to the end of <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>, Act II, explaining that Ortrud’s
			threatening gesture ‘is meant to fill us with foreboding [<hi
			rend="italic">Ahnung</hi>] and the character of the orchestra is
			to clarify the character of that foreboding – and it can only do
			so completely when it is attached to a reminiscence [<hi
			rend="italic">Erinnerung</hi>]; whereupon he prescribes for this
			weighty moment the emphatic repetition of a melodic phrase which
			we have already heard as the musical expression of words
			referring to the threat, and which has the characteristic
			property of recalling to us the image of an earlier situation,
			and which now in connection with the threatening gesture becomes
			for us a gripping and determining premonition [<hi
			rend="italic">Ahnung</hi>], that determines our feeling’. See
			<hi rend="italic">O&amp;D</hi> (Kropf), 384. Is Wagner boxing
			himself into a theoretical corner in this passage?  In part it
			would seem so. Nearing the very end of his long treatise, Wagner
			insists a few pages earlier ‘that the first thing that the
			orchestra has to express according to its special abilities is
			the dramatic gesture of the plot’. In this section, Wagner rants
			against extraneous orchestral interludes during which one might
			as well have a chat with one’s neighbour and wait for the
			‘music’ to be over. He goes on to make the extreme suggestion
			that ‘when [Ortrud’s] threatening gesture is omitted … the
			appearance of a musical phrase might even seem like a fantastic
			caprice on the part of the composer’. This is an odd and
			unnecessary position for him to hold, since the letter of 8
			September 1850 to Liszt makes clear that by the end of Act II,
			the music of the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> ‘by now
			has clearly imprinted itself in our minds’. Surely he must still
			have been smarting in 1851 about the curtain having come down
			too soon during the first performances of <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> at Weimar a year earlier. Equally
			baffling that his insistence on hearing <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F9"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 9</link> as ‘the emphatic
			repetition of a melodic phrase which we have already heard as
			the musical expression of words referring to the threat’ after
			he took such care to introduce a fanfare-like version of the
			theme which destroys the prosody of those original words. Only
			with his conversion to aspects of Schopenhauer’s musical
			aesthetics three years later, in 1854, will he escape the
			theoretical straitjacket into which he places his critique of
			opera and his elevation of a verbal poetic intent emphasised in
			the 1851 treatise.</p></note> Or is it rather that such
			musical details should prompt an emotive response of which a
			listener should only be partly conscious?</p>
			<p>Equally subliminal is the effect of Wagner’s fastidious
			attention to the orchestration of his themes. We’ve already seen
			the differentiation between the x- and y-segments encoded into
			the orchestration, dynamics, and accents. A further look at the
			TimeMachine shows in addition how – <foreign>pace</foreign>
			Thomas Mann – Wagner <hi rend="italic">never</hi> actually
			repeats himself. (See the TimeMachine orchestration view.) Even
			when there is a predominant set of instruments highlighted for
			statements of the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> – as in the <hi
			rend="italic">cor anglais</hi> and the clarinet – not one of the
			<hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> iterations is an exact copy, but rather a
			nuanced retouching of the musical material, each shaping the new
			dramatic moment. The passages in <hi rend="italic">Oper und
			Drama </hi>(1851) treating instrumentation [<hi
			rend="italic">Instrumentation</hi>] can easily be read as an
			advertisement for the variegated orchestration Wagner had
			already pioneered in <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>: rather
			than seeking ‘enjoyment in the playing of the orchestra’ as in
			dramatically indifferent operas, ‘the musician engaged with the
			poetic intent … doesn’t have to restrain himself, but can rather
			completely sharpen his powers of invention to the point of
			discovering the orchestra’s most varied linguistic capabilities,
			so as to accommodate … the most pertinent and precise
			expression’.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn31" n="31"><p><hi
			rend="italic">O&amp;D</hi> (Kropf), 386.</p></note>
			Only people, not musical instruments, have linguistic
			capabilities, so we can see how Wagner crafted his orchestration
			to aspire to the constant shift of nuance that made it feel as
			if the orchestra were speaking.</p>
			<p>Another nuance found in the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> concerns the positional
			‘height’ from which the prohibition is enunciated: that is,
			whether the x-segment hovers <hi rend="italic"
			xml:space="preserve">above </hi>with foreboding or is grounded
			as an established fact. Here Wagner toys with the harmonic
			distinction between a minor chord in second inversion and one in
			root position. When beginning with a <hi rend="sub">6/4</hi>
			chord, the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> projects a
			sense of menace, since its pronouncement lacks an underlying
			tonic pitch in the bass, and the fifth scale degree in the bass
			hoists the utterance above ground, as it were. When beginning
			with a root-position chord, the ban conveys a sense of
			inevitability and conviction, a subtle but important
			distinction. (See the TimeMachine for a display of all
			recurrences with respect to this feature.) The first two
			iterations of the theme were undecided in their harmony since
			they rock back and forth ambiguously between root position and
			second inversion chords. The distinction is ‘marked’ with
			respect to the relative ‘firmness’ or ‘solidity’ of an
			occurrence, since a prolonged <hi rend="figures"><hi
			rend="num">6</hi><hi rend="den">4</hi></hi> chord on its own
			evokes anxiety and unease.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn32"
			n="32"><p>A good example from the <hi rend="italic">Ring</hi> is
			<hi rend="small-caps">Hunding</hi> first heard in <hi
			rend="italic">Die Walküre</hi>, Act I/2. If we replace the
			opening 6<hi rend="superscript">th</hi> chord with a root
			position chord, Hunding’s persona threats to dissolves into
			banal caricature.</p></note> Whereas some later statements of
			the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> underscore the
			ominous quality of the prohibition, others elevate it to a
			matter of certainty, which only a tonic note in the bass of the
			chord can ensure . So after Elsa has breached the ban in Act
			III, the reminiscences in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F15"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 15</link>, <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F16">16</link>
			and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17">17</link>
			are all weighted in the solidity of the root-position chord. No
			doubt or menace remains.</p>
			<p>A similar harmonic feature is marked with respect to the
			closure of the y-segment: whether its cadential goal is a major
			or minor chord, or whether the cadence is interrupted. I noted
			earlier how the initial major resolution signaled a musical
			exclamation point, using the <hi rend="italic">tierce de
			Picardie</hi> as a striking departure from the minor realm. The
			original verse of the prohibition also ended with a rhyme: <hi
			rend="italic">Fahrt</hi> [journey] is neatly rounded off by <hi
			rend="italic">Art</hi> [kind]. The cadential resolutions on the
			major tonic of <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F1"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 1</link> and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F1"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 2</link> therefore don’t
			express the text as much rather its punctuation, since apart
			from the end-rhyme, there is no special dynamic or accent on the
			word <hi rend="italic">Art</hi>. When later reminiscences
			reiterate the y-segment, Wagner fashion three other sorts of
			exclamation, more than can be achieved by punctuation
			alone. First there are two frightening versions of a diminished
			7<hi rend="superscript">th</hi> chord (in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F4"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 4</link> and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F6"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 6</link>) and then a resigned
			iteration in in the tonic minor (in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F13"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 13</link>) once the questions
			have been asked and Telramund has been killed. In two other
			instances (in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F16"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 16</link> and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 17</link>), Wagner diverts
			attention from the apodictic register of the theme and refers
			instead to the wistful and lyrical side of Lohengrin’s character
			already imprinted with the ‘soft’ and ‘holy’ qualities of the
			y-segment.</p>
			<p>As for Lohengrin’s compassion, the final iteration of the
			y-segment on its own – in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F18"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 18</link> – poses an
			intriguing hermeneutic problem, since it includes, to be sure, a
			reminiscence, but not one that recalls the question-ban. The
			passage occurs in the second part of the Act III Grail narrative
			and is little known because Wagner cut it before the first
			performance and excluded it from later editions.<note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn33" n="33"><p>The restored passage is found in Richard
			Wagner, <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin WWV 75 (Anhang 7,III:
			Gestrichene Strophe der Gralserzählung, Lyrische
			Stücke)</hi>, eds. John Deathridge and Klaus Döge (Mainz
			2000), III:202-12.</p></note> Lohengrin has already
			revealed his name and patrimony and then says:</p>
			<table rows="1" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l><foreign>Nun höret noch, wie ich zu euch gekommen! –</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Ein klagend Tönen trug die Luft daher,</foreign></l>
							<l><hi rend="bold"><foreign>daraus im Tempel wir sogleich vernommen,</foreign></hi></l>
							<l><hi rend="bold"><foreign>dass fern wo eine Magd in Drangsal wär’;</foreign></hi></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l> </l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> 7</l>
							<l><link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 17</link></l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			</table>
			<table rows="1" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l>Now hear further how I came to you! –</l>
							<l>From afar the air bore a wailing sound,</l>
							<l>From which we in the temple at once heard<hi rend="bold"></hi></l>
							<l><hi rend="bold">That a distant maiden was in distress;</hi></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l> </l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> 7</l>
							<l><link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 17</link></l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			</table>
			<p>As the TimeMachine shows, Lohengrin sings the words in bold
			to the y-segment (aborted on the dominant 7<hi
			rend="superscript">th</hi> just before the cadence) heard in
			<link target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 17</link>. But how can the
			Grail knight’s perception of a ‘damsel in distress’ have a
			bearing on why he is unable to reveal his identity? At first
			glance, if one had to choose another bit of text from the
			narration which better fits the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>, it would
			be the lines that appeared earlier in the first (published) part
			of the Grail narrative which either names the ‘forbidden
			question’ <hi rend="italic">Nun hört, wie ich verbotner Frage lohne!</hi>
			[‘Hear how I reward the forbidden question!’] or his explanation
			in an earlier poetic draft:</p>
			<foreign>
				<lg>
					<l>Selbst wer von ihm in ferne Land entsendet,</l>
					<l>zum Streiter für der Tugend Recht ernannt,</l>
					<l>dem wird nicht seine heil'ge Kraft entwendet,</l>
					<l>bleibt als sein Ritter dort er unerkannt;</l>
					<l>so hehrer Art doch ist des Grales Segen,</l>
					<l>enthüllt - muss er des Laien Auge fliehn;</l>
				</lg>
			</foreign>
			<lg>
				<l>Even he who is sent by it to a distant land,</l>
				<l>appointed as a champion of virtue,</l>
				<l>will not be robbed of its holy power,</l>
				<l>provided that he, as its knight, remains unrecognised there.</l>
				<l>For so holy is the Grail’s blessing </l>
				<l>that when revealed it must shun the uninitiated’s eye;</l>
			</lg>
			<p>So Lohengrin can’t tell Elsa who he is because he would be
			‘robbed of his holy power’ to help her. But neither can the
			orchestra sound the <hi rend="small-caps">FRAGEVERBOT</hi> to
			his mention of the ‘forbidden question’, since, as we saw, his
			theme referred to a prohibition, not a question. The music
			cannot accompany the rationale behind the prohibition, as when
			Lohengrin speaks of losing the Grail’s blessing, but ostensibly
			only about Elsa remaining in ignorance.</p>
			<p>So why does Wagner set the y-segment in <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17">17</link> to
			a text set about the Grail knights hearing Elsa’s lament borne
			by the winds? It can only be, I imagine, because Wagner
			conceived the lyricism of the y-segment as embodying the
			compassionate high-mindedness of the Grail knights almost to the
			eclipse of the stern command of the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>’s x-segment. For this reason,
			the x- and y-segments were not only detachable motifs during the
			course of the opera, but Wagner took pains to link this music –
			and its local orchestration with <hi rend="italic">divisi</hi>
			violins and violas – to the spiritual ambience of the Grail
			temple evoked both in the Grail narration in the third Act as
			well as in the first-act Prelude. As a ‘leitmotif’ linked to
			dramatic reminiscence, <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F17">17</link> is
			useless in the (suppressed) second part of the Grail narration,
			since the link is irrelevant. But what we can suppose Wagner
			intended was an allusion to the Lohengrin who sings the tender
			y-segment, the same Lohengrin who ‘at once perceived’ Elsa’s
			distress in the Grail temple. Expressed as audible metaphor, the
			music suggests we hear the lyrical y-phrase (heard originally in
			<link target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F1"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 1</link> and <link
			target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F2"><hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 2</link> in Act I) as
			redolent of the Grail in its evocation of tender holiness,
			thereby making sense of its chorale-like texture and
			harmony. Only now in the (complete version of the) Grail
			narrative in Act III do we hear that very same phrase sung by
			Lohengrin that evokes the compassionate knighthood serving
			justice and spirituality. Indeed, Wagner introduces the
			y-segment on the very word <hi rend="italic">Tempel</hi>
			[temple].</p>
			<p>The <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>, with its two
			contrasting motifs or segments, is thus in a state of flux
			throughout the opera, never asserting just one fixed meaning or
			reminiscence. And if the iterations of the x-segment approximate
			a command recalled later as a threat, the y-segment conveys more
			of what Wagner named as a ‘characteristic ‘ in the 1844 letter
			to Gaillard and the 1851 letter to Uhlig, capturing a vivid
			image of the character called Lohengrin caught in an impossible
			dilemma. Migrating everywhere within its orchestral habitat,
			torn apart into its constituent segments, commanded, whispered,
			insinuated or blared depending on context, the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> makes a definitve <hi
			rend="italic">Einprägung</hi> or ‘imprint’ on the audience, whom
			Wagner names in his letter to Liszt. What’s more, the vagaries
			of those imprints give rise to powerful techniques of expression
			that Wagner pointed out to Uhlig, but which the composer had no
			appetite to analyse himself.</p>
		</div>
		<div>
			<head>The <hi rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> theme</head>
			<p>With the <hi rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi>, the composer
			designed the first statement with words to be sung, which played
			a role, even a subliminal one, in later reiterations of the
			theme or its motivic components, even when those words became
			difficult to recall, as was shown. With the motif, and theme
			I’ve called <hi rend="small-caps">Elsas gesegneter Schritt</hi>
			[Elsa’s blessed gait], the developing affective sense of the
			music was tied both to the situation onstage – which Wagner
			tried to fix by his stage directions – as well by words of the
			chorus commenting on that stage. Then again, this last example,
			even if identified by Wagner himself as of interest, was limited
			in its relevance to the entire opera, since it only occurred
			twice, albeit in two distinct scenes. With more global themes,
			such as one entitled <hi rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi>, one
			needs to be alert to the possibility – mostly ignored by the
			leitmotif tradition – that only later instances of the theme
			reveal the full sense of its music. Especially when a backstory
			is withheld, as in Lohengrin’s identity as a Grail knight, then
			it can be important not to privilege the first hearing of a
			motif but allow the composer time to explore and reveal dramatic
			associations inhering in the musical substance.</p>
			<p>The long <hi rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> theme, for
			example, appears first in Elsa’s Dream in Act I, where she
			imagines a knight with chivalrous bearing arriving to save
			her. This knight duly appears, and after pronouncing the ban
			querying his identity, and accepting King Henry’s invitation to
			lead the Brabantines into battle, is referred throughout the
			opera to as the Protector of Brabant [<hi rend="italic">Schützer
			von Brabant</hi>]. The first bar and a half of this stirring
			music – dubbed motif x – shows up repeatedly in all three acts
			to emphasise this connection, as does the heroic trope of
			another snippet from the theme – dubbed motif y, as can be seen
			in the <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> TimeMachine. Although
			not yet named until the Grail narration in Act III, the music
			seems clearly devised to capture the character of the valiant
			hero, both as successful defender of Elsa’s innocence and future
			protagonist of the Brabantine nobles.  Indeed, at the end of
			Lohengrin’s Grail narration (<hi rend="italic">Im fernen Land,
			unnahbar euer Schritten</hi>) when the hero finally names
			himself, it’s difficult to miss that the opening snippet of <hi
			rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> – motif x – famously sounds as
			a <hi rend="italic">coup de théâtre</hi>, with its gallant music
			amply emblazoned with heraldic fanfares mapped directly onto the
			protagonist’s identity. So it would seem that we now
			know for sure that the theme heard in Elsa’s dream and at the
			hero’s arrival denoted none other than the knight Lohengrin
			himself.</p>
			<p>Or do we? In fact, in Wagner’s suppressed version of the
			Grail narration in Act III, one makes a shocking
			discovery. There we find that it isn’t <hi
			rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> but rather the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> that sounds just as Lohengrin
			reveals his identity, an incongruity that will come as a huge
			surprise to anyone familiar with the opera. That is, Wagner’s
			original plan for the most signal event in the opera – when
			Lohengrin answers the prohibited question – was not for the
			protagonist to identify himself not as a hero but as the son of
			the leader and a knight of holy Grail linked to its mystical
			Christian narrative and mission he has just recounted, replete
			with the story of the holy vessel brought down to earth by a
			host of angels and tended by a knighthood given godly powers to
			fight evil and defend virtue: </p>
			<table rows="1" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l><foreign>Vom Gral ward ich zu euch daher gesandt:</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Mein Vater Parzifal trägt seine Krone, –</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Sein Ritter ich – bin Lohengrin genannt.</foreign></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l> </l>
							<l> </l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 11</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			</table>
			<table rows="1" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l>By the Grail was I sent to you from there:</l>
							<l>My father Parzifal wears its crown, –</l>
							<l>Its knight am I, and Lohengrin is my name.</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l> </l>
							<l> </l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 11</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			</table>
			<p>The chorus of women and men react precisely to the link
			between the hero’s identity and the holiness of the Grail, by
			singing a counterpoint to the <hi
			rend="small-caps">Gral</hi>theme (heard in its original key of A
			major) and noting how in beholding him they are ‘gripped with a
			blessed shock’ [<hi rend="italic">uns faßt vor ein selig
			Grauen!</hi>].This plain intention – along with Wagner’s choice
			not to sound <hi rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> at just this
			juncture – suggests that what is one of the longest ‘leitmotifs’
			he ever composed does not, like <hi
			rend="small-caps">Siegfried</hi>in the <hi
			rend="italic">Ring</hi>, stand as the musical emblem for the
			opera’s protagonist.</p>
			<p>So just what was Wagner’s idea behind the music of the
			<hi>LOHENGRIN</hi> theme? The answer lies in the text and music
			for the excised strophes of the Grail narration:</p>
			<table rows="4" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l><foreign>Als wir den Gral zu fragen nun beschickten,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Wohin ein Ritter zu entsenden sei,–</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Da auf der Flut wir einen Schwan erblickten,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Zu uns zog einen Nachen er herbei:–</foreign></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 12</l>
							<l> </l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> 3</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l><foreign>Mein Vater, der erkannt des Schwanes Wesen,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Nahm ihn in Dienst nach des Grales Spruch:</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Denn wer ein Jahr nur seinem Dienst erlesen,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Dem weicht von dann ab jedes Zaubers Fluch.</foreign></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> 4</l>
							<l></l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 12</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l><foreign>Zunächst nun sollt’er mich dahin geleiten,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Woher zu uns der Hilfe Rufen kam;</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Denn durch den Gral war ich erwählt zu Streiten,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Darum ich mutig von ihm Abschied nahm.</foreign></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l></l>
							<l></l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 14</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>						
					</cell>
				</row>
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l><foreign>Durch Flüsse und durch wildes Meeres Wogen,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>hat mich der treue Schwan dem Ziel genaht,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>bis er zu euch daher an’s Ufer mich gezogen,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>wo ihr in Gott mich alle landen saht.</foreign></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F13"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 13</link></l>
							<l></l>
							<l></l>
							<l>(<link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F13"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 13</link>)</l>
							<l><link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F14"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 14</link></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			</table>
			<table rows="4" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l>When we now asked of the Grail,</l>
							<l>Where a knight was to be sent,–</l>
							<l>On the waves we sighted a swan</l>
							<l>nearing us in a boat:–</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 12</l>
							<l> </l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> 3</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l>My father, who knew the swan’s kind,</l>
							<l>Took him into service laid down by the Grail’s rule:</l>
							<l>For only when the chosen one serves a year,</l>
							<l>Is every magic curse from then revoked.</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> 4</l>
							<l></l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 12</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l>It was set that I escort him back</l>
							<l>Whence came the call for help;</l>
							<l>For through the Grail elected was I for combat,</l>
							<l>Summoning courage I took my leave.</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l></l>
							<l></l>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> 14</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l>Through rivers and waves of the fierce ocean</l>
							<l>the loyal swan neared me to the goal,</l>
							<l>till he tugged me toward you on the shore</l>
							<l>where by God’s grace you all saw me land.</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F13"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 13</link></l>
							<l></l>
							<l></l>
							<l>(<link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F13"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 13</link>)</l>
							<l><link
							target="https://meld.linkedmusic.org/companion/F14"><hi
							rend="small-caps">Frageverbot</hi> 14</link></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			</table>
			<p>To recapitulate the narrative: having heard Elsa’s wailing
			sound [<hi rend="italic">ein klagend Töne</hi>] and recognised a
			‘damsel in distress’ – both as mourner of her brother Gottfried
			and as a woman accused unjustly of his murder – the knights
			‘sighted’ her younger brother Gottfried cast by Ortrud’s magic
			in the form of a swan drawing a small boat. The swan approaches
			the knights with the entreaty that one return with him to
			Antwerp to defend his sister. Lohengrin’s father Parzifal [sic],
			King of the Grail Knights, recognises the curse laid on the swan
			and conveys the Grail’s ruling that after a year in its service,
			the curse will be revoked. The music </p>
			<p>labelled <hi rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> sounds in full
			throughout during the knight’s lengthy description of his
			journey back to Brabant ‘via rivers and waves of the fierce
			ocean until he pulled me toward you on the shore where by God’s
			grace you all saw me land.’ And as Lohengrin sings the phrase
			‘where you all saw me land’ Wagner restates the head-motif of
			<hi rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> to encapsulate the lengthy
			journey – the end of the narrative of the entire backstory –
			which is what prompts the assembled women and men, ‘choked with
			the greatest emotion’ [<hi rend="italic">mit größter
			Rührung</hi>] to sing in <hi rend="italic">pianissimo</hi>:</p>
			<table rows="1" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l><foreign>Hör’ ich so seine höchste Art bewähren,</foreign></l>
							<l><foreign>Entbrennt mein Aug’ in heil’gen Wonnezähren!</foreign></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Heilige Wonnezähren</hi> 2</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			
			</table>
			<table rows="1" column="2">
				<row>
					<cell type="text">
						<lg>
							<l>When I hear such proof of his highest ancestry,</l>
							<l>My eyes burst in holy tears of bliss!</l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
					<cell type="margin">
						<lg>
							<l><hi rend="small-caps">Heilige Wonnezähren</hi> 2</l>
							<l></l>
						</lg>
					</cell>
				</row>
			</table>
			<p>This theme, perhaps more emblematic of Wagner’s ‘endless
			melody’ than any other, is easily heard as a representation of
			the flowing of <hi rend="small-caps">Heilige Wonnezähren</hi>
			([BLISSFUL TEARS]), which with their continually averted
			cadences and a full three-octave descent in an unsingable
			melodic treble, never wish to end. Heard for the only time since
			sounded in the first-act Prelude, likewise as a reaction to
			multiple statements of the <hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi>
			theme, <hi rend="small-caps">Heilige Wonnezähren 2</hi>is also
			consonant with Wagner’s prose text for concert performances of
			the first-act Prelude from 1853 which specify the programme as a
			pre-history of the Grail’s descent to earth to a ‘single
			solitary’ – someone who later become the protagonist’s father
			Titurel in <hi rend="small-caps">Parsifal</hi>. Brought down to
			earth by an angelic horde, the Grail is gradually revealed in
			its full glory, and the observer of the scene loses
			consciousness and sinks down in adoring abnegation. [da
			schwinden dem Schauenden die Sinne; er sinkt nieder in
			anbetender Vernichtung.] Yet above the one lost in love’s bliss,
			the Grail now pours out its blessing, with which it consecrates
			him as its knight. [Doch über den in Liebeswonne Verlorenen
			gießt der Gral nun seinen Segen aus, mit dem er ihn zu seinem
			Ritter weiht’. This long act of consecration, sinking and
			pouring of the Grail’s precious liquid is expressed
			magnificently in Wagner’s musical theme, and then reiterated
			only once with choral commentary following the Lohengrin motivic
			snippet to bind together past and present. But because the prose
			programme and its textual content was never meant to be
			distributed at opera performances, we are left with a
			fascinating experience of a texted piece of music referring back
			nostalgically and allegorically to a piece of pure instrumental
			music, whose affective content supersedes the realm of the
			verbal. (Indeed, Wagner later develops virtually the entire
			opera of Tristan und Isolde from this procedure.)</p>
			<p>So Wagner’s ‘vivid image’ for <hi
			rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi>, given the extraordinary length
			of the expanded 12-bar thematic period (4+4+4), was initially
			conceived as depicting the heroic travels of Gottfried, the
			bewitched swan, and the knight Lohengrin as they braved ‘the
			rivers and waves of the fierce ocean’ to return to defend the
			distressed Elsa. If the brilliantly apposite wavy arpeggios and
			the chivalrous dotted figures in the music were not enough to
			characterise this journey, we can also take note of a suppressed
			phrase found in the prose draft that didn’t find its way into
			the poetry: that the journey coursed through the waters ‘in
			magically-powered speed’ [<hi rend="italic">in zauberischer
			Schnelle</hi>]. (The prose draft of the forbidden question had
			also omitted any explicit prohibition on asking about
			Lohengrin’s name, which suggests Wagner never planned to link
			the <hi rend="small-caps">Lohengrin</hi> theme to the moment
			when he reveals his identity.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn34"
			n="34"><p><hi rend="italic">SW</hi> 26:213</p></note>)</p>
			<p>Had Wagner not suppressed his initial intention, the <hi
			rend="small-caps">LOHENGRIN</hi> theme might better be dubbed
			“Gottfried’s and Lohengrin’s magic journey”! Given this
			authorial intention, we can now see that <hi
			rend="small-caps">LOHENGRIN</hi> 1 first heard in Elsa’s Dream
			in Act I implies that Elsa is recounting the end of this magic
			journey from her imprecise and dream-like vantage point: <hi
			rend="italic">ein Ritter nahte da</hi> [a knight drew near], she
			sings, but she can’t know that her brother Gottfried is drawing
			the knight’s barque. And at Lohengrin’s first appearance, Elsa
			has just recalled her dream, singing <hi rend="italic">Laß mich
			ihn sehn wie ich ihn sah, sei er mir nah!</hi> [Let me see him
			as I saw him, may he approach me!], we have the incomplete
			action without the backstory. The ‘miracle’ intoned by the
			chorus refers therefore to their own point of view rather than
			the end of a magic journey led by Gottfried as a swan. Only in
			July of 1850 had Wagner ‘become convinced that this second
			section of the [Grail] narration [was] bound to produce
			something of an anti-climax’ and hence he ‘insisted [to Liszt]
			that the passage … be omitted’.<note place="bottom"
			xml:id="ftn35" n="35"><p>Letter to Franz Liszt of 2 July
			1850. Selected Letters of Richard Wagner, eds. Stewart Spencer
			and Barry Millington (Dent: London, 1987), 209.</p></note> But in so
			doing he actually censored aspects of Lohengrin’s back-story and
			compromised on a potentially powerful insight into the role
			played by Gottfried before the opera begins. (The few recent
			recordings restoring the cut strophe show an interest in
			rethinking Wagner’s decision.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn36"
			n="36"><p>A fine example is a <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>
			conducted by Semyon Bychkov and sung by Johann Botha with the
			WDR Sinfonieorchester Köln on Profil PH09004 (2009).</p></note>)
			Still, it was certainly the case that Wagner was disinterested
			in precise hermeneutics: it was the perfume and constant
			transformations of his themes with their sometimes concrete and
			sometimes amorphous associations that motivated him. It’s also
			worth recalling the composer’s anxiety – which of course forms
			his distaste for leitmotifs and guides to them – that they might
			be heard as explicit mechanisms: No, ‘they are not to be heard
			at all [<hi rend="italic">gar nicht gehört zu werden</hi>], …
			not in their mechanical presence but only in their organic
			efficacy [<hi rend="italic">Wirksamkeit</hi>] at one with the
			drama’.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn37" n="37"><p>Richard
			Wagner, <hi rend="italic">DS</hi>,
			8:364.</p></note></p>
		</div>
		<div>
			<head>Other motifs and themes in <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi></head>
			<p>It is no different with the other thirteen repeated motifs
			and themes that inhabit Lohengrin, that is, those heard in more
			than one scene. Even the harmonic chassis undergirding such
			simple motifs such as the <hi rend="small-caps">Königsruf</hi>
			[Royal fanfare] is altered over the course of the opera, which
			demonstrates Wagner’s burning interest in casting familiar
			musical utterances into unexpected new forms, in every case
			alluding to a subtle emotive nuance. I’ve already mentioned two
			other global themes and motifs – <hi rend="small-caps">Gral</hi>
			[Grail] and <hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> [Swan] – where
			Wagner has cleverly embedded <hi rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi>
			into the second bar of <hi rend="small-caps">Gral.</hi> Then
			there was <hi rend="small-caps">Elsas gesegneter Schritt
			</hi>[Elsa’s blessed gait], transformed from motif into theme
			between scenes ii and iv in Act II. The other themes and motifs
			make an equally indelible impression on the compositional
			substance of the opera, though some are far more prominent than
			others.<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn38" n="38"><p>John
			Deathridge surely counts too sparingly when he claims that
			‘there are only six motifs that recur regularly throughout
			Lohengrin’ and that ‘Wagner’s understandable wish to project his
			ideas about motif backward in order to make it seem like a
			logical precursor to the project he was currently working on
			[was] a self-invented myth that has persuaded countless
			commentators to privilege the issue of themes and motifs in the
			earlier work over more interesting aspects of the
			score’. Deathridge, ><hi rend="italic">Beyond
			Good and Evil</hi>, 39. I’ve already
			cited Wagner’s 1850 letter to Genast above (see footnote 13)
			which refers to the composer’s ‘working out of the most deeply
			felt and most necessarily essential motifs’ in Lohengrin’, in
			which it clear that Wagner isn’t projecting ‘ideas about motif
			backward’ onto Lohengrin. While I’m unsure which ‘more
			interesting aspects of the score’ Deathridge is referring to, it
			is fair to note that some major dramatic pronouncements in 
			<hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> – ‘Höchstes Vertraun’, for example, in Act
			III – are unconnected with the thematic web of themes. That the
			stirring music for such passages is so memorable is simply a
			testament to Wagner’s powers of musical characterization without
			regard to the question of musical recurrence. What is equally
			true, though, is that such moments are removed from the central
			trajectory of musical ‘fragrances’ which motivated Wagner to
			sketch out <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>’s threefold web of
			themes: the Grail in A/A flat, König Heinrich in C and the
			Ortrud motifs in F sharp / F.</p></note> A few are
			easy to label for the sake of convenience – <hi rend="small-caps">Gotteskampf</hi>
			[Divine battle], <hi rend="small-caps">Gralsklänge</hi> [Grail sounds],
			<hi rend="small-caps">Ruhm</hi> [Glory], <hi rend="small-caps">Feierliches geleit</hi> [Solemn
			Procession], <hi rend="small-caps">Süsses Herz</hi> [Sweet heart] and
			<hi rend="small-caps">Wonnezähren</hi> [tears of joy] – all in the major
			mode. Then there are Ortrud’s eerie <hi rend="small-caps">Zauber</hi> [Magic] and
			the <hi rend="small-caps">Versuchung</hi> [Temptation] motifs based on dissonant
			harmonic collections in the F-sharp-minor realm.<note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn39" n="39"><p>I discuss the harmony of Ortrud’s
			<hi rend="small-caps">Versuchung</hi> [Temptation] in <hi
			rend="italic">Wagner and the Erotic Impulse</hi> (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
			2010), 101-2, and 232.</p></note> </p>
			<p>Other themes, though, pose more intractable problems even in
			devising heuristic names precisely because they either accrue
			meanings over the course of the opera or are too rich in
			significance to be pinned down to a single label. Chief among
			these is <hi rend="small-caps">Elsas Unschuld</hi> [Elsa’s
			innocence], which, if correctly characterised by its name,
			should by no means make three appearances in the orchestral
			Prelude to Act I of Lohengrin. Here – according to Wagner’s
			prose programme<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn40"
			n="40"><p>Wagner, ‘Vorspiel zu <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>’,
			<hi rend="italic">DS</hi> 2:201-3.</p></note> – the music recounts
			the pre-history of the Grail cup brought down to earth by a host
			of angels long before Elsa’s troubles began. And when he later
			wrote about the character of this ‘motif’ and its unusual
			harmonic progression in an essay from 1879, Wagner never
			broached the somewhat mysterious question of why this ‘musical
			phrase’ –labeled neither a theme nor a motif! - was included in
			a Prelude that was intended to represent a poetic unity rather
			than a potpourri of themes, as in an overture.<note
			place="bottom" xml:id="ftn41" n="41"><p>Wagner, ‘Anwendung’, <hi
			rend="italic">DS</hi>
			9:340-2.</p></note></p>
		</div>
		<div>
			<head>Abandoning the unitary idea of a leitmotif</head>
			<p>The word ‘leitmotif’ does scant justice to the wealth of
			techniques marking such music and its recurrences, and in fact
			impoverishes our engagement with Wagner’s music and drama. I
			queried at the outset how Thomas Mann could claim that Wagner
			‘repeats a thing so many times’ so that ‘you believe it’. The
			solution to the paradox is simple: what appears repetitive is
			relentless and incessant variation enhancing the dramatic
			experience. While Wagner’s ‘thematic web’ in <hi
			rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> pale before the density of thematic
			recurrences that surface in his next work <i>Das Rheingold</i>,
			there can be little doubt that in <i>Lohengrin</i> the composer
			aspired to change how a listener grasped both character and
			dramatic connections in opera via music. Whereas Theodor Uhlig
			reserved his praise of <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> for this
			‘musical unity in a much higher sense’ [<hi rend="italic">eine
			musikalische Einheit in viel höherem Sinne</hi>], it was Wagner
			who pointed Uhlig to ‘the spacious and broad fruition’ [<hi
			rend="italic">breit und hell zur ausführung kommt</hi>] of his
			themes and motives responding to a ‘vivid image’ [<hi
			rend="italic">plastische Erscheinung</hi>] that ‘constantly
			creates new forms’. </p>
			<p>Even inexperienced listeners devoid of analytical reflection
			register such processes by their often strong reactions. The
			Grand Duke Carl Alexander of Saxony attended several of the
			Liszt’s performances of <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi> in
			1850. In his diary, he writes: </p>
			<quote rend="block">Never before have I found this emotion so
			eloquently expressed as in <hi rend="italic">Lohengrin</hi>. I
			could have wept ... The chords that accompany the appearance of
			the swan ... touched me as when a long, separated part of a
			whole is suddenly reunited with it. These chords belong to
			me!!!”<note place="bottom" xml:id="ftn42" n="42"><p><hi
			rend="italic">Niemals habe ich
			diese Empfindung so beredt ausgedrückt gefunden wie im
			Lohengrin. Ich hätte weinen können ... Die Akkorde, die das
			Erscheinen des Schwans begleiten ..., haben mich berührt, wie
			wenn ein lange abgesonderter Teil eines Ganzen sich plötzlich
			mit ihm wieder vereinigt. Diese Akkorde gehören zu mir!!!
			</hi>Thüringisches Hauptstaatsarchiv
			Weimar: Großherzogliches Hausarchiv. Schriftlicher Nachlass Carl
			Alexanders, A XXVI, Nr. 1948, Tagebuch, 30 September 1850. Cited
			in Angelika Pöthe, Carl Alexander: Mäzen in Weimars “Silberner
			Zeit (Cologne, Weimar and Vienna: Böhlau, 1998), 268. Citation
			and translation by David Trippett in ‘Lohengrin Premiere’,
			138.</p></note></quote>
			<p>What moved Carl Alexander was nothing less than a burst of
			emotion produced when Wagner extracted the two chords of <hi
			rend="small-caps">Schwan</hi> from the second bar of <hi
			rend="small-caps">Gral</hi> and married those two experiences
			via a musical ‘synecdoche’. The ‘long separated part’ – two
			chords of A major and F sharp minor – was ‘reunited’, not in
			Wagner’s score nor in the poem – but in the Grand Duke’s head
			and heart. The bonding of those experiences, first musical and
			then dramatic, yields a sense of ownership impossible to
			restrain. The response is all the more poignant because it was
			untouched by the later tradition of ‘leitmotifs’ obsessed with
			dramatic recall, and demonstrates how Wagner’s thematic web
			casts spells even when one is unaware of its reach. The
			‘leitmotif’ shines little light on these kinds of <hi
			rend="italic">musical</hi> phenomena, as Wagner himself noted,
			and obscures what we are capable of hearing and feeling. To
			abandon the leitmotif – and bid welcome to Wagner’s constantly
			varying recurrent themes and motifs – is to welcome the
			subliminal effect of Wagner’s ‘vivid images’ in music that revel
			in the interplay between affinities and contrasts, between sound
			and sense.</p>
		</div>
		</body>
	</text>
</TEI>
